
4 Elementary procedures for Mobility Management
===============================================

4.1 General
-----------

This clause describes the procedures used for mobility management for
non-GPRS services and for GPRS-services at the radio interface
(Reference Point Um and Uu).

The main function of the Mobility Management sublayer is to support the
mobility of user terminals, such as informing the network of its present
location and providing user identity confidentiality.

A further function of the MM sublayer is to provide connection
management services to the different entities of the upper Connection
Management (CM) sublayer (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]).

There are two sets of procedures defined in this chapter:

\- MM procedures for non-GPRS services (performed by the MM entity of
the MM sublayer); and

\- GMM procedures for GPRS services (performed by the GMM entity of the
MM sublayer), see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\].

All the MM procedures described in this clause can only be performed if
a RR connection has been established between the MS and the network.
Else, the MM sublayer has to initiate the establishment of a RR
connection (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.3 and
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

In A/Gb mode, the GMM procedures described in this clause, use services
provided by the RR sublayer without prior RR connection establishment.

In Iu mode: all the GMM procedures described in this clause can only be
performed if a PS signalling connection has been established between the
MS and the network. Else, the GMM sublayer has to initiate the
establishment of a PS signalling connection (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

GMM procedures are mandatory and applicable only for GPRS MSs and
networks supporting those MSs. For GPRS MSs which are IMSI attached for
both GPRS and non-GPRS services, some MM procedures are replaced by GMM
combined procedures provided that the network operates in network
operation mode I, i.e. is supporting combined GMM procedures. GMM
combined procedures are not applicable for the GPRS MS operation mode C
but are mandatory for the GPRS MS operation modes A and B and networks
supporting network operation mode I, see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\].

### 4.1.1 MM and GMM procedures

#### 4.1.1.1 Types of MM and GMM procedures

Depending on how they can be initiated, three types of MM procedures can
be distinguished:

1\) MM common procedures:

A MM common procedure can always be initiated whilst a RR connection
exists. The procedures belonging to this type are:

Initiated by the network:

\- TMSI reallocation procedure;

\- authentication procedure;

\- identification procedure;

\- MM information procedure;

\- abort procedure.

However, abort procedure is used only if an MM connection is being
established or has already been established i.e. not during MM specific
procedures or during IMSI detach procedure, see subclause 4.3.5.

Initiated by the mobile station:

\- IMSI detach procedure (with the exceptions specified in
subclause 4.3.4).

2\) MM specific procedures:

A MM specific procedure can only be initiated if no other MM specific
procedure is running or no MM connection exists. The procedures
belonging to this type are:

\- normal location updating procedure;

\- periodic updating procedure;

\- IMSI attach procedure; and

\- eCall inactivity procedure.

3\) MM connection management procedures:

These procedures are used to establish, maintain and release a MM
connection between the mobile station and the network, over which an
entity of the upper CM layer can exchange information with its peer. A
MM connection establishment can only be performed if no MM specific
procedure is running. More than one MM connection may be active at the
same time.

Depending on how they can be initiated, three types of GMM procedures
can be distinguished:

1\) GMM common procedures:

In Iu mode, a GMM common procedure can always be initiated whilst a PS
signalling connection exists.

The procedures belonging to this type are:

Initiated by the network when a GMM context has been established:

\- P-TMSI (re-) allocation;

\- GPRS authentication and ciphering;

\- GPRS identification;

\- GPRS information.

2\) GMM specific procedures:

Initiated by the network and used to detach the IMSI in the network for
GPRS services and/or non-GPRS services and to release a GMM context:

\- GPRS detach.

Initiated by the MS and used to attach or detach the IMSI in the network
for GPRS services and/or non-GPRS services and to establish or release a
GMM context:

\- GPRS attach and combined GPRS attach;

\- GPRS detach and combined GPRS detach;

\- eCall inactivity procedure.

Initiated by the MS when a GMM context has been established:

\- normal routing area updating and combined routing area updating;

\- periodic routing area updating.

3\) GMM connection management procedures (Iu mode only):

Initiated by the MS and used to establish a secure connection to the
network and/or to request the resource reservation for sending data:

Service Request.

The Service Request procedure can only be initiated if no MS initiated
GMM specific procedure is ongoing.

##### 4.1.1.1.1 Integrity Checking of Signalling Messages in the Mobile Station (Iu mode only)

In Iu mode only, integrity protected signalling is mandatory with one
exception regarding emergency calls (see subclause 4.1.1.1.1a). In Iu
mode only, all layer 3 protocols shall use integrity protected
signalling once the security mode procedure has been successfully
activated in the network and the MS. Integrity protection of all layer 3
signalling messages is the responsibility of lower layers. It is the
network which activates integrity protection. This is done using the
security mode control procedure (3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

The supervision that integrity protection is activated shall be the
responsibility of the MM and GMM layer in the MS (see
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). In order to do this, the lower layers shall
provide the MM and GMM layer with an indication on when the integrity
protection is activated in the MS (i.e. one indication to the MM layer
when a security mode control procedure for the CS domain is processed
successfully and one indication to the GMM layer when a security mode
control procedure for the PS domain is processed successfully).

The CS and PS domains in the network and the MM and GMM layers in the
MS, are not aware of whether integrity protection has been started in
the lower layers by the other domain. It is mandatory for the network to
initiate one security mode control procedure for the CS domain and one
for the PS domain.

Except the messages listed below, no layer 3 signalling messages shall
be processed by the receiving MM and GMM entities or forwarded to the CM
entities, unless the network has activated the integrity protection for
that domain.

\- MM messages:

\- AUTHENTICATION REQUEST

\- AUTHENTICATION REJECT

\- IDENTITY REQUEST

\- LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT (at periodic location update with no change
of location area or temporary identity, and, any Per MS T3212 value is
not changed)

\- LOCATION UPDATING REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- CM SERVICE ACCEPT, if the following two conditions apply:

\- no other MM connection is established; and

\- the CM SERVICE ACCEPT is the response to a CM SERVICE REQUEST with CM
SERVICE TYPE IE set to \'emergency call establishment\'

\- CM SERVICE REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- ABORT

\- GMM messages:

\- AUTHENTICATION & CIPHERING REQUEST

\- AUTHENTICATION & CIPHERING REJECT

\- IDENTITY REQUEST

\- ATTACH REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT, if any of the following conditions
applies:

\- the MS performs periodic routing area updating with:

\- no change in routing area or temporary identities;

\- no change in T3312 extended value;

\- no change in Network feature support value; and

\- extended DRX parameters IE not included.

\- the GMM entity in the MS has received an ATTACH ACCEPT message with
neither ciphering nor integrity protection applied in response to an
ATTACH REQUEST message with attach type set to \"emergency attach\"; or

\- the MS has performed intersystem change from S1 mode to Iu mode with
a PDN connection for emergency bearer services for which the \"null
integrity protection algorithm\" EIA0 has been used while in S1 mode.

\- ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- SERVICE REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- DETACH ACCEPT (for non power-off)

\- ATTACH ACCEPT, if the ATTACH ACCEPT is the response to an ATTACH
REQUEST with attach type set to \"emergency attach\".

\- SERVICE ACCEPT, if any of the following conditions applies:

\- the GMM entity in the MS has received an ATTACH ACCEPT message with
neither ciphering nor integrity protection applied in response to an
ATTACH REQUEST message, with attach type set to \"emergency attach\"; or

\- the MS has performed intersystem change from S1 mode to Iu mode with
a PDN connection for emergency bearer services for which the \"null
integrity protection algorithm\" EIA0 has been used while in S1 mode.

\- CC messages:

\- all CC messages, if the following two conditions apply:

\- no other MM connection is established; and

\- the MM entity in the MS has received a CM SERVICE ACCEPT message with
no ciphering or integrity protection applied as response to a CM SERVICE
REQUEST message, with CM SERVICE TYPE set to 'Emergency call
establishment' sent to the network;

\- the MM connection was established locally due to the SRVCC handover
of a PDN connection for emergency bearer services for which the \"null
integrity protection algorithm\" EIA0 has been used while in S1 mode or
for which integrity protection has not been activated while in Iu mode;
or

\- the MM connection was established locally due to the 5G-SRVCC
handover from NG-RAN to UTRAN of an emergency PDU session for which the
\"null integrity protection algorithm\" 5G-IA0 has been used while in N1
mode.

\- SM messages:

\- all SM messages, if any of the following conditions applies:

\- the GMM entity in the MS has received an ATTACH ACCEPT message with
neither ciphering nor integrity protection applied in response to an
ATTACH REQUEST message, with attach type set to \"emergency attach\"; or

\- the MS has performed intersystem change from S1 mode to Iu mode with
a PDN connection for emergency bearer services for which the \"null
integrity protection algorithm\" EIA0 has been used while in S1 mode.

Once integrity protection is activated, the receiving layer 3 entity in
the MS shall not process any layer 3 signalling messages unless they
have been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers. If any
signalling messages, having not successfully passed the integrity check,
are received, then the lower layers in the MS shall discard that message
(see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]). If any layer 3
signalling message is received, in either PS or CS domains, as not
integrity protected even though the integrity protection has been
activated in the MS by that domain in the network, then the lower layers
shall discard this message (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

Integrity checking on the network side is performed by the RNC and is
described in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\].

##### 4.1.1.1.1a Integrity protection for emergency call (Iu mode only)

The network should initiate the security mode procedure for an emergency
call, in the same way as it would for any other call except in the cases
defined in sub-clause \"Security Procedures Not Applied\" in
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

For the establishment of a MM connection for an emergency call when no
other MM connection is established (e.g. for an emergency call initiated
without a SIM/USIM no other MM connections can exist) the decision on
whether or not to apply the security procedures shall be made by the
network as defined in the subclause \"Emergency Call Handling\" in
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. If the MM connection was established locally due
to the SRVCC handover of a PDN connection for emergency bearer services
for which the \"null integrity protection algorithm\" EIA0 has been used
while in S1 mode or for which integrity protection has not been
activated while in Iu mode, the network need not apply the security
procedures for this call. If the MM connection was established locally
due to the 5G-SRVCC handover from NG-RAN to UTRAN of an emergency PDU
session for which the \"null integrity protection algorithm\" 5G-IA0 has
been used while in N1 mode, the network need not apply the security
procedures for this call.

For an attach for emergency bearer services, (e.g. initiated without a
SIM/USIM) the decision on whether or not to apply the security
procedures shall be made by the network as defined in the subclause
\"Emergency Call Handling\" in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. After intersystem
change from S1 mode to Iu mode with a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services for which the \"null integrity protection algorithm\"
EIA0 has been used while in S1 mode, the network need not apply the
security procedures for this connection.

For an initial registration for emergency services, (e.g. initiated
without a SIM/USIM) the decision on whether or not to apply the security
procedures shall be made by the network as defined in the clause J.2 of
3GPP TS 33.501 \[170\]. After 5G-SRVCC handover from NG-RAN to UTRAN
with an emergency PDU session for which the \"null integrity protection
algorithm\" 5G-IA0 has been used while in N1 mode, the network need not
apply the security procedures for this connection.

#### 4.1.1.2 MM-GMM co-ordination for GPRS MS\'s

##### 4.1.1.2.1 GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I

If the network operates in mode I, GPRS MSes that operate in mode A or B
and wish to be or are simultaneously IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS
services, shall use the combined GPRS attach and the combined and
periodic routing area updating procedures instead of the corresponding
MM specific procedures IMSI attach and normal and periodic location area
updating.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I,
shall perform the combined GPRS attach or routing area update procedure
regardless the value of the ATT flag.

If a GPRS MS is operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in
mode I the IMSI detach shall be performed by the GMM using the combined
GPRS detach procedure.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I,
shall perform the combined GPRS detach procedure regardless the value of
the ATT flag.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in network that operates in mode I,
shall use the combined GMM specific procedures in place of the MM
specific procedures unless the re-activation of the MM specific
procedures is explicitly described, so all conditions describing when to
trigger an MM specific procedure listed in subclauses 4.3 and 4.4 shall
not apply.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I
should not use any MM timers relating to MM specific procedures, (e.g.
T3210, T3211, T3212, T3213) unless the re-activation of the MM specific
procedures is explicitly described. If the MM timers are already
running, the MS should not react on the expiration of the timers.

NOTE 1: Whenever GMM performs a combined GMM procedure, a GPRS MS enters
the MM state MM LOCATION UPDATING PENDING in order to prevent the MM
from performing a location area updating procedure.

If the authentication procedure is performed by MM and the
authentication is rejected by the network (i.e. upon receive of
AUTHENTICATION REJECT), the MS shall in addition set the GPRS update
status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall, if available, delete the
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number
stored. The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS and
non-GPRS services until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The MS
shall abort any GMM procedure and shall enter state GMM-DEREGISTERED. If
S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM parameters
EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and KSI
as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the EPS
authentication is not accepted by the network.

If the PS or CS domain is barred because of domain specific access
control, a GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates
in mode I shall act as if in network operation mode II and access to the
barred domain shall be stopped entirely. If the MS detects that a domain
is barred, this shall not trigger any MM or GMM specific procedure.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I
shall perform a normal location updating procedure (in order to remove
the Gs association in the MSC/VLR) when the following conditions are
fulfilled:

\- the GPRS MS has camped on a cell where the PS domain is barred and
the CS domain is unbarred; and

\- T3312, T3311, T3302, or T3330 expires; and

\- for the last attempt to update the registration of the location area
a combined GMM procedure was performed.

Additionally the MS shall treat the expiry of T3312 when the PS domain
changes from barred to unbarred, analogous to the descriptions for the
cases when the timer expires out of coverage or in a cell that does not
support GPRS (see subclause 4.7.2.2).

If timer T3312 expires and both the PS and CS domain are barred, then a
GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I
shall treat the expiry of T3312 when the GPRS MS detects that the PS or
CS domain becomes unbarred, analogous to the descriptions for the cases
when the timer expires out of coverage (see subclause 4.7.2.2).

If the PS domain is barred and timer T3312 expires during an ongoing CS
connection, then a GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that
operates in mode I shall treat the expiry of T3312 when the MM state
MM-IDLE is entered, analogous to the descriptions for the cases when the
timer expires out of coverage or in a cell that does not support GPRS
(see subclause 4.7.2.2), or in a cell where the PS domain is barred.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode I
shall perform a combined routing area update procedure indicating
\"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\" (in order to establish the
Gs association in the MSC/VLR) when the following conditions are
fulfilled:

\- the GPRS MS detects that CS or PS domain or both change from barred
to unbarred;

\- as a result of the change of the domain specific barring status, both
domains are unbarred; and

\- for the last attempt to update the registration of the location area
an MM specific procedure was performed (see subclause 4.7.5.2.1) or for
the last attempt to update the registration of the routing area a normal
routing area update was performed.

A GPRS MS operating in mode A or B on a PLMN which is part of
\"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" list in a network that is operating
in mode I shall act as if in network operation mode II and proceed with
appropriate MM procedures.

##### 4.1.1.2.2 GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates in mode II

If the network operates in mode II, a GPRS MS that operates in mode A or
B and wishes to be or is simultaneously IMSI attached for GPRS and
non-GPRS services, shall use the MM specific procedures listed in
subclauses 4.3 and 4.4 and the GMM specific procedures listed in
subclauses 4.7.3, 4.7.4 and 4.7.5. The applicability of periodic
location updating is further specified in subclause 4.4.2 and the
periodic routing area updating is specified in subclause 4.7.2.2. If the
GPRS MS, which operates in mode A or B, wishes to be IMSI attached for
GPRS and \"SMS-only service\"or is simultaneously IMSI attached for GPRS
and non-GPRS services in order to obtain GPRS services and \"SMS-only
service\", then the GPRS MS shall first complete the GMM specific
procedure before performing the MM specific procedures. If this GPRS MS
receives in the ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message the
Additional network feature support IE indicating \"SMS via GPRS
supported\", then the GPRS MS shall not perform the MM specific
procedure until a new ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message indicating \"SMS via GPRS not supported\" or the GPRS MS does
not wish to be IMSI attached only for GPRS and \"SMS-only service\".

If the authentication procedure is performed by MM and the
authentication is rejected by the network (i.e upon receive of
AUTHENTICATION REJECT), the MS shall in addition set the GPRS update
status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall, if available, delete the
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number
stored. The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS and
non-GPRS services until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The MS
shall abort any GMM procedure and shall enter state GMM-DEREGISTERED. If
S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM parameters
EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and KSI
as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the EPS
authentication is not accepted by the network.

If the PS or CS domain is barred because of domain specific access
control, a GPRS MS operating in mode A or B in a network that operates
in mode II shall use the MM specific procedures or GMM specific
procedures, respectively, in the domain which is unbarred. If the MS
detects that a domain changes from barred to unbarred, it shall behave
as specified in subclauses 4.3.4.4, 4.4.4.9, 4.5.1.2, 4.7.3.1.5,
4.7.4.1.4, 4.7.5.1.5, and 4.7.13.5.

#### 4.1.1.2A Coordination between GMM and EMM

See subclause 5.1.4 in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\].

#### 4.1.1.2B Coordination between GMM and 5GMM

See subclause 5.1.5 in 3GPP TS 24.501 \[167\].

#### 4.1.1.3 Core Network System Information for MM (Iu mode only)

In the network broadcast system information some of the system
information is used by MM.

At reception of new system information, the RRC layer in the MS delivers
the contents of the CN common system information and the CS domain
specific system information to the MM layer in the MS.

The Core Network system information is included in specific information
elements within some RRC messages sent to MS (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]
and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]). In the Core Network system information the
Common system information part and the CS domain specific system
information part contains settings of parameters controlling MM
functionality. No MM messages contain the Core Network System
Information.

#### 4.1.1.4 Core Network System Information for GMM (Iu mode only)

##### 4.1.1.4.1 General

In the network broadcast system information some of the system
information is used by GMM.

At reception of new system information, the RRC layer in the MS delivers
the contents of the CN common system information and the PS domain
specific system information to the GMM layer in the MS.

The Core Network system information is included in specific information
elements within some RRC messages sent to MS (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]
and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]). In the Core Network system information the
Common system information part and the PS domain specific system
information part contains settings of parameters controlling GMM
functionality. No GMM messages contain the Core Network System
Information.

##### 4.1.1.4.2 Control of Network Mode of Operation I

The behaviour of the MS with respect to NMO I is determined by the
combination of PS domain specific system information IE as defined in
subclause 10.5.1.12.3 and the setting of the parameter
\"NMO\_I\_Behaviour\" in the NAS configuration Management Object as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as
specified in 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]:

\- if the parameter \"NMO\_I\_Behaviour\" in the NAS configuration
Management Object is set to the value of \"1\", the bit 2 \"NMO I\" of
system information as described in figure 10.5.1.12.3/table 10.5.1.12.3
is applied; or

\- if the parameter \"NMO\_I\_Behaviour\" in the NAS configuration
Management Object is set to the value of zero or is not provisioned, the
bit 1 \"NMO\" of system information as described in
figure 10.5.1.12.3/table 10.5.1.12.3 is applied.

#### 4.1.1.5 Access class control

The network can restrict the access for certain groups of mobile
stations. These groups are also known as access classes.

The restriction can apply for access to both domains (common access
class control or EAB, depending on EAB configuration) or to one domain
only (domain specific access control) (see 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]).

Additionally, the network can alleviate the access restriction in both
domains or domain specifically, and allow restricted mobile stations to
respond to paging messages or to perform generic location updating, or
GPRS attach or routing area updating procedure.

A network operator can also restrict some MSs to access the network for
location registration, although via common access class control or
domain specific access class control the MSs are permitted to access the
network for other purposes. Therefore, for each access to the network
the mobile station shall determine from the information received via the
system information broadcast whether access is allowed or not:

\- For paging response the mobile station shall evaluate the control
information for common access control (as specified in
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], 3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\], and
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]), the control information for EAB (as specified
in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]), domain specific
access control (as specified in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] and
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]), and the specific control information for paging
response (as specified in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]; see \"Paging
Permission with Access Control\").

\- For generic location updating, GPRS attach and routing area updating
procedures the mobile station shall evaluate the control information
for:

\- common access control (as specified in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\],
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\], and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]);

\- domain specific access control (as specified in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]
and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]);

\- specific control information for location registration (as specified
in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]; see \"Paging Permission with Access
Control\"); and

\- EAB as specified for A/Gb mode in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], and for Iu
mode in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].

The same control information shall also be taken into account, when the
present document requires the mobile station to initiate a generic
location updating, or GPRS attach or routing area updating procedure
when it detects that a domain changes from barred to unbarred (see e.g.
subclauses 4.1.1.2.1 and 4.1.1.2.2).

\- For GPRS attach and routing area updating procedures in Iu mode, the
mobile station shall evaluate the control information for:

\- ACDC if the mobile station supports ACDC (as specified in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

The same control information shall also be taken into account, when the
present document requires the mobile station to initiate a GPRS attach
or routing area updating procedure in Iu mode when it detects that PS
domain changes from barred to unbarred (see e.g. subclauses 4.1.1.2.1
and 4.1.1.2.2).

\- For all other purposes the mobile station shall evaluate the control
information for common access control as specified in
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], 3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\], and
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\], the control information for EAB (as specified in
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]), domain specific
access control (as specified in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] and
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) and in Iu mode for PS domain if the mobile
station supports ACDC, the control information for ACDC (as specified in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

#### 4.1.1.6 Specific requirements for MS configured to use timer T3245

The following requirement applies for an MS that is configured to use
timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]):

When the MS adds a PLMN identity to the \"forbidden PLMN list\" or the
\"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" list or sets the SIM/USIM as
invalid for non-GPRS services or GPRS services or both, and timer T3245
is not running, the MS shall start timer T3245 with a random value,
uniformly drawn from the range between 12h and 24h.

Upon expiry of the timer T3245, the MS shall erase the \"forbidden PLMN
list\" and the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" list and set the
SIM/USIM to valid for non-GPRS services and GPRS services. When the
lists are erased, the MS performs a cell selection according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

If the MS is switched off when the timer T3245 is running, the MS shall
behave as follows when the MS is switched on and the SIM/USIM in the MS
remains the same:

\- let t1 be the time remaining for T3245 timeout at switch off and let
t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the MS will follow the behaviour as
defined in the paragraph above upon expiry of the timer T3245. If the MS
is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1.

#### 4.1.1.6A Specific requirements for the MS when receiving non-integrity protected reject messages

This subclause specifies the requirements for an MS that is not
configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) and receives a LOCATION UPDATING REJECT, CM
SERVICE REJECT, ABORT, ATTACH REJECT, ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT or
SERVICE REJECT message without integrity protection with specific MM or
GMM causes.

NOTE 1: Additional MS requirements for this case, requirements for other
MM or GMM causes, and requirements for the case when the MS receives a
successfully integrity checked reject message are specified in
subclauses 4.4.4.7, 4.5.1.1, 4.7.3.1.4, 4.7.3.2.4, 4.7.5.1.4, 4.7.5.2.4
and 4.7.13.4.

The present subclause is applicable to A/Gb mode and Iu mode. In A/Gb
mode,

\- for the CS domain, as integrity protection is not supported, all
messages received by the MS are considered to be received \"before the
network has activated the integrity protection\"; and

\- for the PS domain, if integrity protection is not required (see
subclause 4.7.1.2a.), all messages received by the MS are considered to
be received \"before the network has activated the integrity
protection\".

The MS may maintain a list of PLMN-specific attempt counters and a list
of PLMN-specific PS-attempt counters. The maximum number of possible
entries in each list is implementation dependent.

Additionally, the MS may maintain one counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for non-GPRS services\" events and one counter for \"SIM/USIM
considered invalid for GPRS services\" events.

The MS may also maintain a list of \"forbidden location areas for
non-GPRS services\" and a list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS
services\". If the MS is in a location area which is included in the
list of \"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS services\", the MS shall
not initiate any MM procedure. If the MS is in a location area which is
included in the list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\",
the MS shall not initiate any GMM, SM, SMS or SS procedure for GPRS
services.

If the MS receives a LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message without integrity
protection with MM cause value \#2, \#3, \#6, \#11, \#12, \#13 or \#15
before the network has activated the integrity protection for the CS
domain, the MS shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly
drawn from the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is
not running, and take the following actions:

1\) if the MM cause value received is \#3 or \#6, and

a\) if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, the MS shall:

i\) delete any LAI, TMSI and ciphering key sequence number stored in the
SIM/USIM, reset the location update attempt counter, and set the update
status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it in the SIM/USIM according to
subclause 4.1.2.2);

delete the list of equivalent PLMNs;

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection;

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events;

store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\"; and

search for a suitable cell in another location area or a tracking area
according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or
3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\]; or

ii\) proceed as specified in subclause 4.4.4.7 and;

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection;

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events; and

b\) else the MS shall proceed as specified in subclause 4.4.4.7;

2\) if the MM cause value received is \#2, and

a\) if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, the MS shall:

i\) delete any LAI, TMSI and ciphering key sequence number stored in the
SIM/USIM, reset the location update attempt counter, and set the update
status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it in the SIM/USIM according to
subclause 4.1.2.2);

delete the list of equivalent PLMNs;

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection;

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events;

if the MS maintains a list of \"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS
services\" and a list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\",
proceed as follows:

if the current LAI is already included in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for GPRS services\" or the MS is not operating in MS
operation mode A or B, store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\"; otherwise store the current LAI in the
list of \"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS services\"; and

attempt to select a suitable cell according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\], different from the cell
where the LOCATION UPDATING REJECT was received; or

NOTE 2: The cell on which the reject was received could still be a
suitable cell.

ii\) proceed as specified in subclause 4.4.4.7 and;

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection;

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events; and

b\) else the MS shall proceed as specified in subclause 4.4.4.7;

3\) if the MM cause value received is \#12, \#13 or \#15, the MS shall
additionally proceed as specified in subclause 4.4.4.7;

4\) if the MM cause value received is \#11 and the MS is in its HPLMN or
in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list:

the MS shall delete any LAI, TMSI and ciphering key sequence number
stored in the SIM/USIM, reset the location update attempt counter, and
set the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it in the
SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2). Additionally, the MS shall
store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\"; and

the MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or a
tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\]; and

5\) if the MM cause value received is \#11 and if the MS is not in its
HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, in addition to the MS
requirements specified in subclause 4.4.4.7,

\- if the MS maintains a list of PLMN-specific attempt counters and the
PLMN-specific attempt counter for the PLMN sending the reject message
has a value less than an MS implementation-specific maximum value, the
MS shall increment the PLMN-specific attempt counter for the PLMN.

If the MS receives a CM SERVICE REJECT or ABORT message with MM cause
value \#6 without integrity protection before the network has activated
the integrity protection for the CS domain, the MS shall start timer
T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30
minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running, and

a\) if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, the MS shall:

i\) proceed as specified in subclauses 4.5.1.1 or 4.3.5.2 respectively
with the exception that the MS shall not consider the SIM/USIM as
invalid for non-GPRS services and;

delete the list of equivalent PLMNs;

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection;

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events;

reset the location update attempt counter;

store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\"; and

search for a suitable cell in another location area or a tracking area
according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or
3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\]; or

ii\) proceed as specified in subclauses 4.5.1.1 or 4.3.5.2 respectively
and;

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection;

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events; and

b\) else the MS shall proceed as specified in subclause 4.5.1.1 or
4.3.5.2 respectively.

If the MS receives an ATTACH REJECT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT
message without integrity protection with GMM cause value \#3, \#6, \#7,
\#8, \#11, \#12, \#13, \#14 or \#15 before the network has activated the
integrity protection for the PS domain, the MS shall start timer T3247
with a random value uniformly drawn from the range between 30 minutes
and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running, and shall take the
following actions:

6\) if the GMM cause value received is \#3, \#6, or \#8, and

a\) if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, the MS shall:

i\) set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any RAI,
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering key sequence number;

delete the list of equivalent PLMNs;

increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\" events;

if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence
number. If the MS is operating in MS operation mode A and an RR
connection exists, the MS shall abort the RR connection, unless an
emergency call is ongoing. In Iu mode, the MS shall increment the
counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\"
events, if not already incremented over the same RRC connection. In A/Gb
mode, the MS shall increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for non-GPRS services\" events;

if a GPRS attach or routing area updating procedure was performed, reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter or the routing area updating attempt
counter, respectively;

if S1 mode is supported by the MS, handle the EMM parameters attach
attempt counter or tracking area updating attempt counter, EMM state,
EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and KSI
as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when an EPS attach
or tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause of the
same value in a NAS message without integrity protection;

store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\" and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE; and

search for a suitable cell in another location area or a tracking area
according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or
3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\]; or

ii\) proceed as specified in subclauses 4.7.3.1.4, 4.7.3.2.4, 4.7.5.1.4,
4.7.5.2.4 and 4.7.13.4;

increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\" events; and

if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value:

in Iu mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events, if not already incremented over the same RRC
connection

in A/Gb mode, increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events; and

b\) else the MS shall proceed as specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.4,
4.7.3.2.4, 4.7.5.1.4, 4.7.5.2.4 and 4.7.13.4;

7\) if the GMM cause value received is \#7, and

a\) if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, the MS shall:

i\) set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any RAI,
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering key sequence number;

delete the list of equivalent PLMNs;

increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\" events;

\- if a GPRS attach or routing area updating procedure was performed,
reset the GPRS attach attempt counter or the routing area updating
attempt counter, respectively;

if S1 mode is supported by the MS, handle the EMM parameters attach
attempt counter or tracking area updating attempt counter, EMM state,
EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered TAI, TAI list and KSI
as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when an EPS attach
or tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause of the
same value in a NAS message without integrity protection;

enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE;

if the MS maintains a list of \"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS
services\" and a list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\",
proceed as follows:

if the current LAI is already included in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for non-GPRS services\" or the MS is operating in MS
operation mode C, store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\"; otherwise store the current LAI in the
list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\"; and

attempt to select a suitable cell according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\], different from the cell
where the ATTACH REJECT or ROUTING AREA UPDATING REJECT was received; or

NOTE 3: The cell on which the reject was received could still be a
suitable cell.

ii\) proceed as specified in subclauses 4.7.3.1.4, 4.7.3.2.4, 4.7.5.1.4,
4.7.5.2.4 and 4.7.13.4; and

increment the counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\" events; and

b\) else the MS shall proceed as specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.4,
4.7.3.2.4, 4.7.5.1.4, 4.7.5.2.4 and 4.7.13.4;

8\) if the GMM cause value received is \#12, \#13 or \#15, the MS shall
additionally proceed as specified in subclauses 4.7.3.1.4, 4.7.3.2.4,
4.7.5.1.4, 4.7.5.2.4 and 4.7.13.4;

9\) if the GMM cause value received is \#11 or \#14 and the MS is in its
HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list:

\- the MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The MS shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs. Additionally, if a
GPRS attach or the routing area updating procedure was performed, the MS
shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter or the routing area updating
attempt counter respectively;

\- for GMM cause value \#11, the MS shall store the current LAI in the
list of \"forbidden location areas for roaming\", and enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE;

\- for GMM cause value \#14, the MS shall enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE. If the MS maintains a list of
\"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS services\" and a list of
\"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\", proceed as follows:

if the current LAI is already included in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for non-GPRS services\" or the MS is operating in MS
operation mode C, store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\"; otherwise store the current LAI in the
list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\";

\- if S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter or tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value without
integrity protection; and

\- the MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or
in another tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

10\) if the GMM cause value received is \#11 and the MS is not in its
HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, the MS shall
additionally proceed as specified in subclauses  4.7.3.1.4, 4.7.3.2.4,
4.7.5.1.4, 4.7.5.2.4 and 4.7.13.4:

\- Furthermore, if the MS maintains a list of PLMN-specific attempt
counters and the PLMN-specific attempt counter for the PLMN sending the
reject message has a value less than an MS implementation-specific
maximum value, the MS shall increment the PLMN-specific attempt counter
for the PLMN.

11\) if the GMM cause value received is \#14 and the MS is not in its
HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the EHPLMN list, the MS shall
additionally proceed as specified in subclauses 4.7.3.1.4, 4.7.3.2.4,
4.7.5.1.4, and 4.7.5.2.4:

\- Furthermore, if the MS maintains a list of PLMN-specific PS-attempt
counters and the PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter for the PLMN sending
the reject message has a value less than an MS implementation-specific
maximum value, the MS shall increment the PLMN-specific PS-attempt
counter for the PLMN.

\- If the MS maintains a list of \"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS
services\" and a list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\",
proceed as follows:

if the current LAI is already included in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for non-GPRS services\" or the MS is operating in MS
operation mode C, store the current LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\"; otherwise store the current LAI in the
list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\" and the MS shall
enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the MS receives a SERVICE REJECT message without integrity protection
with GMM cause value \#3, \#6, \#7, \#8, \#11, \#12, \#13 or \#15 before
the network has activated the integrity protection for the PS domain,
the MS shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from
the range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not
running, and proceed as specified under items 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 above.

Upon expiry of timer T3247, the MS shall:

\- erase the list of \"forbidden location areas for regional provision
of service\" and the list of \"forbidden location areas for roaming\";

\- set the SIM/USIM to valid for non-GPRS services, if

\- the MS does not maintain a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for non-GPRS services\" events; or

\- the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and this counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

\- set the SIM/USIM to valid for GPRS services, if

\- the MS does not maintain a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for GPRS services\" events; or

\- the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\" events and this counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

\- erase the list of \"forbidden location areas for non-GPRS services\"
and the list of \"forbidden location areas for GPRS services\", if the
MS maintains these lists;

\- if the MS maintains a list of PLMN-specific attempt counters, for
each PLMN-specific attempt counter that has a value greater than zero
and less than an MS implementation-specific maximum value, remove the
respective PLMN from the forbidden PLMN list;

\- if the MS maintains a list of PLMN-specific PS-attempt counters, for
each PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter that has a value greater than zero
and less than an MS implementation-specific maximum value, remove the
respective PLMN from the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" list. If
the resulting \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" list is empty and the
MS is supporting S1 mode, the MS re-enables the E-UTRA capability as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when timer T3247
expires;

\- if the MS is supporting S1 mode, handle the list of \"forbidden
tracking areas for regional provision of service\" and the list of
\"forbidden tracking areas for roaming\" as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when timer T3247 expires; and

\- initiate a location updating procedure, GPRS attach procedure or
routing area updating procedure, if still needed, dependent on MM state
and update status, and GMM state and GPRS update status, or perform a
PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If the MS maintains a list of PLMN-specific attempt counters and
PLMN-specific PS-attempt counters, when the MS is switched off, the MS
shall, for each PLMN-specific attempt counter that has a value greater
than zero and less than the MS implementation-specific maximum value,
remove the respective PLMN from the forbidden PLMN list. When the
SIM/USIM is removed, the MS should perform this action.

NOTE 4: If the respective PLMN was stored in the extension of the
\"forbidden PLMNs\" list, then according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] the MS
will delete the contents of this extension when the SIM/USIM is removed.

#### 4.1.1.7 Handling of NAS level mobility management congestion control

The network may detect GMM or MM signalling congestion and perform NAS
level mobility management congestion control. PS domain NAS level
mobility management congestion control consists of general NAS level
mobility management congestion control and subscribed APN based
congestion control. CS domain NAS level mobility management congestion
control consists of general NAS level mobility management congestion
control.

Under NAS level mobility management congestion control the network may
reject mobility management signalling requests from MSs as specified in
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]. The network should not reject requests for
emergency bearer services.

When subscribed APN based congestion control is active for a particular
APN, the network may reject attach request from MSs with subscription to
this APN.

In mobility management the network may detect NAS signalling congestion.
The network may start or stop performing the subscribed APN based
congestion control based on mobility management level criteria such as:

\- rate of mobility management NAS messages from a group of MSs with a
subscription to a particular APN exceeds or falls below certain
thresholds; or

\- setting in network management.

When the NAS level mobility management congestion control is active, the
network may include a value for the mobility management back-off timer
T3246 or T3346 in the reject messages. The MS starts the mobility
management back-off timer with the value received in the mobility
management reject messages. To avoid that large numbers of MSs
simultaneously initiate deferred requests, the network should select the
value for the mobility management back-off timer for the rejected MSs so
that timeouts are not synchronised.

For subscribed APN based congestion control the value of timer T3346 for
a particular APN may be APN dependent.

If the timer T3346 is running when the MS enters state GMM-DEREGISTERED,
the MS remains switched on, and the SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same,
then timer T3346 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the MS is switched off when the timer T3246 or T3346 is running, the
MS shall behave as follows for each running timer when the MS is
switched on and the SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same:

\- let t1 be the time remaining until timeout at switch off and let t be
the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the
MS is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1; and

\- if prior to switch off, timer T3346 was started due to a NAS request
message (ATTACH REQUEST, ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST)
which contained the low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for
NAS signalling low priority\", then if timer T3346 is restarted at
switch on, the MS configured for low priority shall handle mobility
management requests as indicated in subclauses 4.7.3.1.5, 4.7.5.1.5
and 4.7.13.5.

If the MS enters a new PLMN while timer T3246 is running, and the new
PLMN is not equivalent to the PLMN where the MS started timer T3246, the
MS shall stop timer T3246 when initiating mobility management procedures
in the new PLMN.

If the MS enters a new PLMN while timer T3346 is running, and the new
PLMN is not equivalent to the PLMN where the MS started timer T3346, the
MS shall stop timer T3346 when initiating mobility management procedures
in the new PLMN.

At an inter-system change from S1 mode to A/Gb mode or from Iu mode to
A/Gb mode within the same RA, if the timer T3346 is running and the TIN
indicates \"RAT‑related TMSI\", the MS shall set the GPRS update status
to GU2 NOT UPDATED and enter state GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE.

After change in RAI, if the timer T3346 is running and GPRS update
status is GU1 UPDATED then MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU2
NOT UPDATED and enter state GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE.

After change in LAI, if the timer T3246 is running and MM update status
is U1 UPDATED then MS shall set the MM update status to U2 NOT UPDATED
and enter state MM IDLE, ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE.

#### 4.1.1.8 Handling of security related parameters at switch on and switch off

At switch on, an ME supporting UTRAN Iu mode shall proceed as follows:

\- if a USIM is inserted, the ME shall read the START~CS~ and START~PS~
value from the USIM. If START~CS~ and/or START~PS~ read from the USIM
are greater than or equal to the maximum value of START~CS~ and
START~PS~ provided on the USIM (see 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) or the CKSN
or GPRS CKSN stored on the USIM indicates \"no key available\", the ME
shall set the START value in the volatile memory of the ME for the
corresponding core network domain(s) to zero. In addition if the read
START~CS~ and/or START~PS~ are greater than or equal to the maximum
value, the ME shall delete the corresponding CKSN or GPRS CKSN from the
ME and the USIM. The ME shall set the START~CS~ and START~PS~ value on
the USIM to the maximum value of START~CS~ and START~PS~ provided on the
USIM (see 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]); and

\- if a SIM is inserted, the ME shall read the START~CS~ and START~PS~
value from the non-volatile memory. If START~CS~ and/or START~PS~ read
from the non-volatile memory are greater than or equal to the default
value specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\], subclause 6.8.2.4 or the CKSN
or GPRS CKSN stored on the SIM indicates \"no key available\", the ME
shall set the START value in the volatile memory of the ME for the
corresponding core network domain(s) to zero. In addition if the read
START~CS~ and/or START~PS~ are greater than or equal to the default
value, the ME shall delete the corresponding CKSN or GPRS CKSN from the
ME. The ME shall set the START~CS~ and START~PS~ value in the
non-volatile memory to the default value specified in
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\], subclause 6.8.2.4.

NOTE: The lower layer handles the START~CS~ and START~PS~ value stored
in the volatile memory of the ME as specified in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].

Only at switch off, an ME supporting UTRAN Iu mode shall proceed for
each of the two domains, CS and PS, as follows:

\- if since switch on the ME performed an authentication procedure for
the respective domain and stored the new security context on the USIM or
SIM, and the new security context was not taken into use, the ME shall
set the START value for this domain on the USIM or, if a SIM is
inserted, in the non-volatile memory to zero; and

\- otherwise, if a security context for the respective domain is stored
on the USIM or SIM, i.e. the CKSN or GPRS CKSN stored on the USIM or SIM
is different from \"no key available\", the ME shall store the current
START value used by the lower layer for this domain on the USIM or, if a
SIM is inserted, in the non-volatile memory.

#### 4.1.1.9 Equivalent PLMNs list

The mobile equipment shall store a list of \"equivalent PLMNs\". These
PLMNs shall be regarded by the MS as equivalent to each other for PLMN
selection and cell selection/re-selection. The same list is used by EMM,
GMM and MM.

The list of equivalent PLMNs is replaced or deleted at the end of each
location updating procedure, routing area updating procedure and GPRS
attach procedure. The stored list consists of a list of equivalent PLMNs
as downloaded by the network plus the PLMN code of the registered PLMN
that downloaded the list. The stored list shall not be deleted when the
MS is switched off. The stored list shall be deleted if the SIM/USIM is
removed or when an MS attached for emergency bearer services enters the
state GMM-DEREGISTERED. The maximum number of possible entries in the
stored list is 16.

#### 4.1.1.10 Dedicated core network

The network may reject mobility management signalling requests from MSs
due to dedicated core network as specified in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\].
When the network rejects mobility management signalling requests due to
dedicated core network, the mechanism for general NAS level mobility
management congestion control as specified in subclause 4.1.1.7 shall be
followed.

### 4.1.2 MM sublayer states

The description of the states for the MM sublayer is organized as
follows. The main states for the MS side, related to the procedures, are
described in subclause 4.1.2.1.1. The MM IDLE state is subdivided in
substates for the description of the behaviour in idle mode
(subclause 4.1.2.1.2). This behaviour depends on an update status,
described in subclause 4.1.2.2. The states for the network side are
described in subclause 4.1.2.3.

#### 4.1.2.1 MM sublayer states in the mobile station

In this subclause, the possible states for the MM sublayer in the mobile
station is described. In figure 4.1 of the present document, an overview
of the MM sublayer protocol is given.

##### 4.1.2.1.1 Main states

0 NULL

The mobile station is inactive (e.g. power down). Important parameters
are stored. Only manual action by the user may transfer the MM sublayer
to another state.

3 LOCATION UPDATING INITIATED

A location updating procedure has been started and the MM awaits a
response from the network. The timer T3210 is running.

5 WAIT FOR OUTGOING MM CONNECTION

The MM connection establishment has been started, and the MM awaits a
response from the network. The timer T3230 is running.

6 MM CONNECTION ACTIVE

The MM sublayer has a RR connection to its peer entity on the network
side. One or more MM connections are active.

7 IMSI DETACH INITIATED

The IMSI detach procedure has been started. The timer T3220 is running.

8 PROCESS CM SERVICE PROMPT

The MM sublayer has a RR connection to its peer entity on the network
side. The Mobile Station has received a CM SERVICE PROMPT message but
has not yet responded \$(CCBS)\$.

9 WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND

The MM sublayer has a RR connection to its peer entity in the network,
but no MM connection is established. The mobile station is passive,
awaiting further commands from the network. The timer T3240 may be
running.

10 LOCATION UPDATE REJECTED

A location updating procedure has been rejected and RR connection
release is awaited. The timer T3240 is running.

Figure 4.1a/3GPP TS 24.008: Overview mobility management protocol/MS
Side

![](media/image4.emf){width="5.888888888888889in"
height="7.305555555555555in"}

Additions to Figure 4.1a/3GPP TS 24.008

13\. WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION (LOCATION UPDATING)

The MM sublayer has requested RR connection establishment for starting
the location updating procedure.

14\. WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION (MM CONNECTION)

The MM sublayer has requested RR connection establishment for dedicated
mode for starting the MM connection establishment.

15\. WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION (IMSI DETACH)

The MM sublayer has requested RR connection establishment for starting
the IMSI detach procedure.

17\. WAIT FOR REESTABLISH

A lower layer failure has occurred and re-establishment may be performed
from the disturbed CM layer entities.

18\. WAIT FOR RR ACTIVE

The MM sublayer has requested activation of the RR sublayer.

19\. MM IDLE

There is no MM procedure running and no RR connection exists except that
a local MM context may exist when the RR sublayer is in Group Receive
mode. This is a compound state, and the actual behaviour of the mobile
station to Connection Management requests is determined by the actual
substate as described hereafter.

20\. WAIT FOR ADDITIONAL OUTGOING MM CONNECTION.

The MM connection establishment for an additional MM connection has been
started, and the MM awaits response from the network.

21\. MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE)

(Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS talking:) The MM
sublayer has a RR connection on the VGCS channel to its peer entity on
the network side. Only one MM connection is active.

22\. WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE)

(Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS talking:) The MM
sublayer has requested to perform an uplink access on the VGCS channel.

23\. LOCATION UPDATING PENDING

(Only applicable for GPRS MS operation modes A and B; not shown in
figure 4.1a) A location updating has been started using the combined
GPRS attach procedure or the combined GPRS routing area updating
procedure.

24\. IMSI DETACH PENDING

(Only applicable for GPRS MS operation modes A and B; not shown in
figure 4.1a) An IMSI detach for non-GPRS services has been started using
the combined GPRS detach procedure at not switching off.

25\. RR CONNECTION RELEASE NOT ALLOWED

(Only applicable for mobile stations supporting RRLP procedures (see
3GPP TS 44.031 \[23b\]) or LCS procedures over RRC (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\])). All MM connections are released by their CM
entities, but the RR connection is maintained by the network due to an
ongoing RRLP procedure or LCS procedure over RRC.

##### 4.1.2.1.2 Substates of the MM IDLE state

For the description of the behaviour of the MS the MM IDLE state is
subdivided in several substates, also called the service states. The
service state pertains to the whole MS (ME alone if no SIM/USIM is
inserted, or ME plus SIM/USIM). The service state depends on the update
status (see subclause 4.1.2.2) and on the selected cell.

19.1 NORMAL SERVICE

Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U1, a cell is
selected that belongs to the LA where the subscriber is registered.

In this state, all requests from the CM layers are treated normally.

19.2 ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE

Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U2 and a cell is
selected. Requests from upper layers are accepted. Emergency call
requests are treated normally, otherwise the request triggers first a
location updating attempt in the selected cell, and then triggers the
needed procedure only in case of successful location updating, otherwise
the request is rejected.

19.3 LIMITED SERVICE

Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U3, and a cell is
selected, which is known not to be able to provide normal service. Only
emergency services are offered.

19.4 NO IMSI

No valid subscriber data (no SIM/USIM, or the SIM/USIM is not considered
valid by the ME), and a cell is selected. Only emergency services are
offered.

19.5 NO CELL AVAILABLE

No cell can be selected. This state is entered after a first intensive
search failed (state 19.7). Cells are searched at a low rhythm.

This state is also entered when S1 mode is activated in the MS and
current cell is an E-UTRAN cell. No services, except those provided by
CS fallback and SMS over SGs, are offered.

19.6 LOCATION UPDATE NEEDED

Valid subscriber data are available, and for some reason a location
updating must be done as soon as possible (for instance update status is
U1 but the selected cell is not in the registered LA, or the timer has
expired). This state is usually of no duration, but can last, e.g. due
to access class control, (see subclause 4.1.1.2.1).

19.7 PLMN SEARCH

The mobile station is searching for PLMNs, and the conditions for state
19.8 are not met. This state is ended when either a cell is selected
(the new state is 19.1, 19.3 or 19.6), or when it is concluded that no
cell is available for the moment (the new state is 19.5).

19.8 PLMN SEARCH, NORMAL SERVICE

Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U1, a cell is
selected which belongs to the LA where the subscriber is registered, and
the mobile station is searching for PLMNs. This state is ended when
either a cell is selected (the new state is 19.1, 19.3 or 19.6), or when
it is concluded that no cell is available for the moment (the new state
is 19.5).

19.9 RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE)

Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS
listening. Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U1, a
VGCS channel or VBS channel is received in a cell that belongs to the LA
where the subscriber is registered.

In this state, only requests from the GCC or BCC layers are treated.

19.10 RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE)

Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS
listening. Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U3, a
VGCS channel or VBS channel is received in a cell which is known not to
be able to provide normal service.

In this state, only requests from the GCC or BCC layers for the
reception of VGCS or VBS calls are treated and group call emergency
services are offered.

19.11 eCALL INACTIVE

Valid subscriber data are available, update status is U4, and a cell is
selected, which is expected to be able to provide normal service. Only
emergency services and test/reconfiguration calls (see
3GPP TS 22.101 \[8\]) can be initiated by the mobile station. This state
is applicable only to an eCall only mobile station (as determined by
information configured in USIM). The state is entered by the mobile
station in order to avoid MM activity and MM signalling in the absence
of an emergency call or test/reconfiguration call. The state is ended
when an emergency services or test/reconfiguration calls\[8\] is
initiated by the mobile station, the new state depends on the result of
the procedure when returning to MM-IDLE described in subclause 4.2.3.

#### 4.1.2.2 The update Status

In parallel with the sublayer states described in subclause 4.1.2.1 and
which control the MM sublayer protocol, an update status exists.

The update status pertains to a specific subscriber embodied by a
SIM/USIM. This status is defined even when the subscriber is not
activated (SIM/USIM removed or connected to a switched-off ME). It is
stored in a non volatile memory in the SIM/USIM. The update status is
changed only as a result of a location updating procedure attempt (with
the exception of an authentication failure and of some cases of CM
service rejection). In some cases, the update status is changed as a
result of a GPRS attach, GPRS routing area update, service request
network initiated GPRS detach procedure or due to change in LAI while
timer T3246 running.

U1 UPDATED

The last location updating attempt was successful (correct procedure
outcome, and the answer was acceptance from the network). With this
status, the SIM/USIM contains also the LAI of the LA where the
subscriber is registered, and possibly valid TMSI, GSM ciphering key,
UMTS integrity key, UMTS ciphering key and ciphering key sequence
number. Furthermore, if the ME supports any A5 ciphering algorithm that
requires a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is in use, then the ME may
contain a valid GSM Kc~128~. The \"Location update status\" stored on
the SIM/USIM shall be \"updated\".

U2 NOT UPDATED

The last location updating attempt made failed procedurally (no
significant answer was received from the network, including the cases of
failures or congestion inside the network).

For this status, the SIM/USIM can contain a valid LAI of the location
area to which the subscriber was registered, and possibly also a valid
TMSI, GSM ciphering key, UMTS integrity key, UMTS ciphering key and
ciphering key sequence number. For compatibility reasons, all these
fields shall be set to the \"deleted\" value if the LAI is deleted.
However the presence of other values shall not be considered an error by
the mobile station. Furthermore, if the ME supports any A5 ciphering
algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is in use,
then the ME shall delete the GSM Kc~128~ stored if the LAI is deleted.
The \"Location update status\" stored on the SIM/USIM shall be \"not
updated\".

U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED

The last location updating attempt run correctly, but the answer from
the network was negative (because of roaming or subscription
restrictions).

For this status, the SIM/USIM can contain a valid LAI, TMSI, GSM
ciphering key, UMTS integrity key, UMTS ciphering key or ciphering key
sequence number. For compatibility reasons, all these fields shall be
set to the \"deleted\" value if the LAI is deleted. However the presence
of other values shall not be considered an error by the mobile station.
Furthermore, if the ME supports any A5 ciphering algorithm that requires
a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is in use, then the ME shall delete
the GSM Kc~128~ stored if the LAI is deleted. The \"Location update
status\" stored on the SIM/USIM shall be \"Location Area not allowed\".

U4 UPDATING DISABLED

Location updating has been disabled.

For this status, the SIM/USIM does not contain any valid LAI, TMSI, GSM
ciphering key, UMTS integrity key, UMTS ciphering key or ciphering key
sequence number. For compatibility reasons, all these fields shall be
set to the \"deleted\" value at the moment the status is set to eCALL
INACTIVE. However the presence of other values shall not be considered
an error by the mobile station. Furthermore, if the ME supports any A5
ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is
in use, then the ME shall delete the GSM Kc~128~ stored at the moment
the status is set to eCALL INACTIVE. The \"Location update status\"
stored on the SIM/USIM shall be \"not updated\".

#### 4.1.2.3 MM sublayer states on the network side

1\. IDLE

The MM sublayer is not active except possibly when the RR sublayer is in
Group Receive mode.

2\. WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION

The MM sublayer has received a request for MM connection establishment
from the CM layer. A RR connection to the mobile station is requested
from the RR sublayer (i.e. paging is performed).

3\. MM CONNECTION ACTIVE

The MM sublayer has a RR connection to a mobile station. One or more MM
connections are active, or no MM connection is active but an RRLP
procedure or LCS procedure over RRC is ongoing.

4\. IDENTIFICATION INITIATED

The identification procedure has been started by the network. The timer
T3270 is running.

5\. AUTHENTICATION INITIATED

The authentication procedure has been started by the network. The timer
T3260 is running.

6\. TMSI REALLOCATION INITIATED

The TMSI reallocation procedure has been started by the network. The
timer T3250 is running.

7\. SECURITY MODE INITIATED

In Iu mode, the security mode setting procedure has been requested to
the RR sublayer. In A/Gb mode, the cipher mode setting procedure has
been requested to the RR sublayer.

8a. WAIT FOR MOBILE ORIGINATED MM CONNECTION

A CM SERVICE REQUEST message is received and processed, and the MM
sublayer awaits the \"opening message\" of the MM connection.

8b. WAIT FOR NETWORK ORIGINATED MM CONNECTION

A CM SERVICE PROMPT message has been sent by the network and the MM
sublayer awaits the \"opening message\" of the MM connection \$(CCBS)\$.

9\. WAIT FOR REESTABLISHMENT

The RR connection to a mobile station with one or more active MM
connection has been lost. The network awaits a possible re-establishment
request from the mobile station.

10\. WAIT OF A GROUP CALL

Only applicable in case for mobile station supporting VGCS talking. The
MM sublayer has received a request for establishing a VGCS from the GCC
sublayer. The request for establishing a VGCS channels is given to the
RR sublayer.

11\. GROUP CALL ACTIVE

Only applicable in case of mobile station supporting VGCS talking. A
VGCS channel is established by the RR sublayer. An RR connection to the
talking mobile station can be established by the RR sublayer on the VGCS
channel. The MM sublayer is active but no sending of MM message between
the network and the mobile station has occurred.

12\. MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP CALL)

Only applicable in case of mobile station supporting VGCS talking. The
MM sublayer has a RR connection to the talking mobile station on the
VGCS channel. Only one MM connection is active.

13\. WAIT FOR BROADCAST CALL

Only applicable in case of VBS. The MM sublayer has received a request
for a VBS establishment from the BCC sublayer. The request for
establishment of VBS channels is given to the RR sublayer.

14\. BROADCAST CALL ACTIVE

Only applicable in case of VBS. A VBS channel is established by the RR
sublayer. The MM sublayer is active but no explicit MM establishment
between the Network and the mobile station has occurred.

### 4.1.3 GPRS mobility management (GMM) sublayer states

In this subclause, the GMM protocol of the MS and the network are
described by means of two different state machines. In
subclause 4.1.3.1, the states of the GMM entity in the MS are
introduced. The behaviour of the MS depends on a GPRS update status that
is described in subclause 4.1.3.2. The states for the network side are
described in subclause 4.1.3.3.

#### 4.1.3.1 GMM states in the MS

In this subclause, the possible GMM states are described of a GMM entity
in the mobile station. subclause 4.1.3.1.1 summarises the main states of
a GMM entity, see figure 4.1b of the present document. The substates
that have been defined are described in subclause 4.1.3.1.2 and
subclause 4.1.3.1.3.

However, it should be noted that this subclause does not include a
description of the detailed behaviour of the MS in the single states and
does not cover abnormal cases. Thus, figure 4.1b of the present document
is rather intended to give an overview of the state transitions than to
be a complete state transition diagram. A detailed description of the
behaviour of the MS is given in subclause 4.2. Especially, with respect
to the behaviour of the MS in abnormal cases it is referred to
subclause 4.7.

##### 4.1.3.1.1 Main states

##### 4.1.3.1.1.1 GMM-NULL {#gmm-null .H6}

The GPRS capability is disabled in the MS. No GPRS mobility management
function shall be performed in this state.

##### 4.1.3.1.1.2 GMM-DEREGISTERED {#gmm-deregistered .H6}

The GPRS capability has been enabled in the MS, but no GMM context has
been established. In this state, the MS may establish a GMM context by
starting the GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure.

##### 4.1.3.1.1.3 GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED {#gmm-registered-initiated .H6}

A GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure has been started and the
MS is awaiting a response from the network.

##### 4.1.3.1.1.4 GMM-REGISTERED {#gmm-registered .H6}

A GMM context has been established, i.e. the GPRS attach or combined
GPRS attach procedure has been successfully performed. In this state,
the MS may activate PDP contexts, MBMS contexts, may send and receive
user data and signalling information and may reply to a page request.
Furthermore, cell and routing area updating are performed.

##### 4.1.3.1.1.5 GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED {#gmm-deregistered-initiated .H6}

The MS has requested release of the GMM context by starting the GPRS
detach or combined GPRS detach procedure. This state is only entered if
the MS is not being switched off at detach request.

##### 4.1.3.1.1.6 GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATING-INITIATED {#gmm-routing-area-updating-initiated .H6}

A routing area updating procedure has been started and the MS is
awaiting a response from the network.

##### 4.1.3.1.1.7 GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED (Iu mode only) {#gmm-service-request-initiated-iu-mode-only .H6}

A service request procedure has been started and the MS is awaiting a
response from the network.

##### 4.1.3.1.2 Substates of state GMM-DEREGISTERED

The GMM-DEREGISTERED state is subdivided into several substates as
explained below. The substates pertain to the whole MS (ME alone if no
SIM/USIM is inserted, or ME plus SIM/USIM). The selection of the
appropriate substate depends on the GPRS update status, see
subclause 4.1.3.2, and on the selected cell.

##### 4.1.3.1.2.1 GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE {#gmm-deregistered.normal-service .H6}

Valid subscriber data is available, a suitable cell has been found and
the PLMN or LA is not in the forbidden list. In this state, a request
for GPRS attach is performed using the stored temporary mobile
subscriber identity for GPRS (P-TMSI), routing area identification (RAI)
and GPRS ciphering key sequence number in case of GU1. If the GPRS
update status is GU2, the IMSI shall be used to attach for GPRS
services.

##### 4.1.3.1.2.2 GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE {#gmm-deregistered.limited-service .H6}

Valid subscriber data is available, and a cell is selected, which is
known not to be able to provide normal service.

##### 4.1.3.1.2.3 GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTACH-NEEDED {#gmm-deregistered.attach-needed .H6}

Valid subscriber data is available and for some reason a GPRS attach
must be performed as soon as possible. This state is usually of no
duration, but can last, e.g. due to access class control (see
subclause 4.1.1.2.1).

##### 4.1.3.1.2.4 GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH {#gmm-deregistered.attempting-to-attach .H6}

A cell is selected, a previous GPRS attach was rejected or failed due to
a missing response from the network. The execution of further attach
procedures depends on the GPRS attach attempt counter. No GMM procedure
except GPRS attach shall be initiated by the MS in this substate.

##### 4.1.3.1.2.5 GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-IMSI {#gmm-deregistered.no-imsi .H6}

No valid subscriber data is available (no SIM/USIM, or the SIM/USIM is
not considered valid by the ME) and a cell has been selected.

##### 4.1.3.1.2.6 GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE {#gmm-deregistered.no-cell-available .H6}

No cell can be selected. This substate is entered after a first
intensive search failed (substate PLMN SEARCH). Cells are searched for
at a low rhythm. No services are offered.

##### 4.1.3.1.2.7 GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH {#gmm-deregistered.plmn-search .H6}

The mobile station is searching for PLMNs. This substate is left either
when a cell has been selected (the new substate is NORMAL-SERVICE or
LIMITED-SERVICE) or when it has been concluded that no cell is available
at the moment (the new substate is NO-CELL-AVAILABLE).

##### 4.1.3.1.2.8 GMM-DEREGISTERED.SUSPENDED (A/Gb mode only) {#gmm-deregistered.suspended-agb-mode-only .H6}

The MS shall enter this substate when entering dedicated mode and the MS
limitations make it unable to communicate on GPRS channels. The MS shall
leave this substate when leaving dedicated mode.

##### 4.1.3.1.3 Substates of state GMM-REGISTERED

The state GMM-REGISTERED is subdivided into several substate as
explained below. The substates pertain to the whole MS (ME alone if no
SIM/USIM is inserted, or ME plus SIM/USIM).

##### 4.1.3.1.3.1 GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE {#gmm-registered.normal-service .H6}

User data and signalling information may be sent and received.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.2 GMM-REGISTERED.SUSPENDED (A/Gb mode only) {#gmm-registered.suspended-agb-mode-only .H6}

The MS shall enter this substate when entering dedicated mode and when
the MS limitations makes it unable to communicate on GPRS channels. In
this substate, no user data should be sent and no signalling information
shall be sent. The MS shall leave this substate when leaving dedicated
mode.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.3 GMM-REGISTERED.UPDATE-NEEDED {#gmm-registered.update-needed .H6}

The MS has to perform a routing area updating procedure, but its access
class is not allowed in the cell due to access class control (see
subclause 4.1.1.2.1). The procedure will be initiated as soon as access
is granted (this might be due to a cell-reselection or due to change of
the access classes allowed in the current cell). No GMM procedure except
routing area updating shall be initiated by the MS in this substate. In
this substate, no user data and no signalling information shall be sent.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.4 GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE {#gmm-registered.attempting-to-update .H6}

A routing area updating procedure failed due to a missing response from
the network. The MS retries the procedure controlled by timers and a
GPRS attempt counter. No GMM procedure except routing area updating
shall be initiated by the MS in this substate. No data shall be sent or
received.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.5 GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE {#gmm-registered.no-cell-available .H6}

GPRS coverage has been lost or PSM is active in the MS. If PSM is
active, the MS can deactivate PSM at any time by activating the AS layer
when the MS needs to send mobile originated signalling or user data.
Otherwise, the MS shall not initiate any GMM procedures except of cell
(and PLMN) reselection.

Figure 4.1b/3GPP TS 24.008:GMM main states in the MS

##### 4.1.3.1.3.6 GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE {#gmm-registered.limited-service .H6}

A cell is selected, which is known not to be able to provide normal
service. The MS will remain in this sub-state until a cell is selected
which is able to provide normal service.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.7 GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM {#gmm-registered.attempting-to-update-mm .H6}

A combined routing area updating procedure or a combined GPRS attach
procedure was successful for GPRS services only. The MS retries the
procedure controlled by timers and a GPRS attempt counter. User data and
signalling information may be sent and received.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.8 GMM-REGISTERED.IMSI-DETACH-INITIATED {#gmm-registered.imsi-detach-initiated .H6}

The MS performs a combined GPRS detach procedure for non-GPRS services
only (detach type \"IMSI Detach\"). This state is entered if the MS is
attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services in a network that operates in
network mode I and wants to detach for non-GPRS services only. User data
and signalling information may be sent and received.

##### 4.1.3.1.3.9 GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH {#gmm-registered.plmn-search .H6}

The mobile station is searching for PLMNs. This substate is left either
when a cell has been selected (the new substate is NORMAL-SERVICE or
LIMITED-SERVICE) or when it has been concluded that no cell is available
at the moment (the new substate is NO-CELL-AVAILABLE).

#### 4.1.3.2 GPRS update status

In addition to the GMM sublayer states described so far, a GPRS update
status exists.

The GPRS update status pertains to a specific subscriber embodied by a
SIM/USIM. This status is defined even when the subscriber is not
activated (SIM/USIM removed or connected to a switched off ME). It is
stored in a non volatile memory in the SIM/USIM. The GPRS update status
is changed only after execution of a GPRS attach, combined GPRS attach,
network initiated GPRS detach, authentication, service request, paging
for GPRS services using IMSI, routing area updating, combined routing
area updating procedure or due to change in RAI while timer T3346
running.

GU1: UPDATED

The last GPRS attach or routing area updating attempt was successful
(correct procedure outcome, and the answer was accepted by the network).
The SIM/USIM contains the RAI of the routing area (RA) to which the
subscriber was attached, and possibly a valid P-TMSI, GPRS GSM ciphering
key, GPRS UMTS ciphering key, GPRS UMTS integrity key and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number. Furthermore, if the ME supports any GEA ciphering
algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is in use,
then the ME may contain a valid GPRS GSM Kc~128~. Furthermore, if the ME
supports any GIA integrity algorithm that requires a 128-bit integrity
key and a USIM is in use, then the ME may contain a valid GPRS GSM Kint.

GU2: NOT UPDATED

The last GPRS attach or routing area updating attempt failed
procedurally, e.g. no response was received from the network. This
includes the cases of failures or congestion inside the network.

In this case, the SIM/USIM can contain the RAI of the routing area (RA)
to which the subscriber was attached, and possibly also a valid P-TMSI,
GPRS GSM ciphering key, GPRS UMTS ciphering key, GPRS UMTS integrity key
and GPRS ciphering key sequence number. For compatibility reasons, all
these fields shall be set to the \"deleted\" value if the RAI is
deleted. However, the presence of other values shall not be considered
an error by the MS. Furthermore, if the ME supports any GEA ciphering
algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is in use,
then the ME shall delete the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ stored if the RAI is
deleted. Furthermore, if the ME supports any GIA integrity algorithm
that requires a 128-bit integrity key and a USIM is in use, then the ME
shall delete the GPRS GSM Kint stored if the RAI is deleted.

GU3: ROAMING NOT ALLOWED

The last GPRS attach or routing area updating attempt was correctly
performed, but the answer from the network was negative (because of
roaming or subscription restrictions).

In this case, the SIM/USIM can contain the RAI of the routing area (RA)
to which the subscriber was attached, and possibly also a valid P-TMSI,
GPRS GSM ciphering key, GPRS UMTS ciphering key, GPRS UMTS integrity key
or GPRS ciphering key sequence number. For compatibility reasons, all
these fields shall be set to the value \"deleted\" if the RAI is
deleted. However, the presence of other values shall not be considered
an error by the MS. Furthermore, if the ME supports any GEA ciphering
algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key and a USIM is in use,
then the ME shall delete the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ stored if the RAI is
deleted. Furthermore, if the ME supports any GIA integrity algorithm
that requires a 128-bit integrity key and a USIM is in use, then the ME
shall delete the GPRS GSM Kint stored if the RAI is deleted.

If the MS is attached for emergency bearer services, the MS shall not
store the GMM parameters described in this subclause on the SIM/USIM or
in non-volatile memory. Instead the MS shall temporarily store these
parameters locally in the ME and the MS shall delete these parameters
when the MS is detached.

#### 4.1.3.3 GMM mobility management states on the network side

In this subsubclause, the possible states are described for the GMM on
the network side. Subclause 4.1.3.3.1 summarises the main states. The
corresponding substates are described in subclause 4.1.3.3.2.

However, it should be noted that this subclause does not include a
description of the detailed behaviour of the network in the single
states and does not cover abnormal cases. Thus, figure 4.1c/3GPP TS
24.008 is rather intended to give an overview of the state transitions
than to be a complete state transition diagram. A detailed description
of the behaviour of the MS is given in subclause 4.2. Especially, with
respect to the behaviour of the MS in abnormal cases it is referred to
subclause 4.7.

##### 4.1.3.3.1 Main States

##### 4.1.3.3.1.1 GMM-DEREGISTERED {#gmm-deregistered-1 .H6}

The network has no GMM context or the GMM context is marked as detached,
the MS is detached. In this state, the network may answer to a GPRS
attach or combined GPRS attach procedure initiated by the MS.

##### 4.1.3.3.1.2 GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED {#gmm-common-procedure-initiated .H6}

A common GMM procedure, as defined in subclause 4.1.1, has been started.
The network is awaiting the answer from the MS.

##### 4.1.3.3.1.3 GMM-REGISTERED {#gmm-registered-1 .H6}

The GMM context has been established and the GPRS attach procedure has
been successfully performed.

##### 4.1.3.3.1.4 GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED {#gmm-deregistered-initiated-1 .H6}

The network has started a GPRS detach procedure and is awaiting the
answer from the MS.

![](media/image6.emf){width="5.583333333333333in"
height="4.388888888888889in"}

Figure 4.1c/3GPP TS 24.008: GMM main states on the network side

##### 4.1.3.3.2 Substates of state GMM-REGISTERED

The state GMM-REGISTERED is subdivided into two substates as explained
below.

##### 4.1.3.3.2.1 GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE {#gmm-registered.normal-service-1 .H6}

User data and signalling information may be sent and received.

##### 4.1.3.3.2.2 GMM-REGISTERED.SUSPENDED (A/Gb mode only) {#gmm-registered.suspended-agb-mode-only-1 .H6}

In this substate, the lower layers shall be prevented of sending user
data or signalling information.

4.2 Behaviour of the MS in MM Idle state, GMM-DEREGISTERED state and GMM-REGISTERED state
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this subclause, the detailed behaviour of the MS in the main states
MM IDLE, GMM-DEREGISTERED and GMM-REGISTERED is described.
Subclauses 4.2.1 to 4.2.3 refer to the state MM IDLE, whereas
subclauses 4.2.4 and 4.2.5 refer to the states GMM-DEREGISTERED and
GMM-REGISTERED, respectively.

The MM IDLE state is entered when none of the MM procedures are running
and no RR connection exists. It is left when one of the MM procedures
are triggered or a RR connection is established.

The specific behaviour in the MM IDLE state depends on the service state
of the mobile station as described in subclause 4.1.2.1.2. The service
state depends in particular on the update status which is defined in
subclause 4.1.2.2.

How an appropriate service state is chosen after power on is described
in subclause 4.2.1, and the specific behaviour of the mobile station in
MM IDLE state is described in subclause 4.2.2. The service state chosen
when the MM IDLE state is returned to from any state except NULL state
is described in subclause 4.2.3.

It should be noted that transitions between the various MM idle states
are caused by (e.g.):

\- results of procedures on RR connected mode (see subclause 4.2.3);

\- insertion or removal of the SIM/USIM;

\- cell selection/reselection (see also 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]);

\- PLMN search;

\- loss of coverage.

How various MM procedures affects the service state and the update
status is described in the detailed descriptions of the procedures in
subclauses 4.3 to 4.5.

### 4.2.1 Primary Service State selection

#### 4.2.1.1 Selection of the Service State after Power On.

For an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in the USIM), Timers T3242 and T3243 are considered to have
expired at power-on. When mobility management is activated after
power-on, the service state is 19.7 PLMN SEARCH. The detailed processing
in this state is described in detail in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\],
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\], 3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\],
where procedures for power on and selection of PLMN is described in
detail. If the \"Location update status\" stored on the SIM/USIM is
different from \"updated\", then the mobile shall act as if the
\"Location update status\" stored on the SIM/USIM is \"not updated\".

The service state when the PLMN SEARCH state is left depends on the
outcome of the search and on the presence of the SIM/USIM:

\- if no cell has been found, the state is NO CELL AVAILABLE, until a
cell is found;

\- if no SIM/USIM is present the state is NO IMSI;

\- for an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in USIM), the state is eCALL INACTIVE.

\- if the mobile station has been continuously activated since loosing
coverage and then returns to coverage, and if the selected cell is in
the location area where the mobile station is registered and the timer
T3212 has not expired, then the state is NORMAL SERVICE;

\- if the selected cell is in the location area where the mobile station
is registered and IMSI ATTACH is not required and timer T3212 has not
expired, then the state is NORMAL SERVICE;

\- if the mobile station is in automatic network selection mode and the
selected cell is in a forbidden PLMN, is in a forbidden LA, or is a CSG
cell whose CSG ID and associated PLMN identity are not in the Allowed
CSG list or in the Operator CSG list stored in the MS, then the mobile
station enters the LIMITED SERVICE state;

\- if the mobile station is in manual network selection mode and no cell
of the selected PLMN has been found, or the cell that is found in the
selected PLMN is a CSG cell whose CSG ID and associated PLMN identity
are not in the Allowed CSG list or in the Operator CSG list stored in
the MS, then the mobile station enters the LIMITED SERVICE state;

\- otherwise, the mobile station enters the LOCATION UPDATE NEEDED
state.

#### 4.2.1.2 Other Cases

The state PLMN SEARCH is also entered in the following cases:

\- in state NO IMSI, a SIM/USIM is inserted;

\- in any state except NO IMSI, NO CELL AVAILABLE, NORMAL SERVICE and
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE) after the user has asked for a
PLMN selection;

\- in any state except NO IMSI and NO CELL AVAILABLE, coverage is lost;

\- roaming is denied;

\- optionally, when the mobile station is in the ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE
state and is in Automatic Network Selection mode and location update
attempt counter is greater than or equal to 4.

The service state when the PLMN SEARCH is left depends on the outcome of
the search and on the presence of the SIM/USIM as specified in
subclause 4.2.1.1.

### 4.2.2 Detailed Description of the MS behaviour in MM IDLE State.

In the MM IDLE state the mobile station shall behave according to the
service state. In the following subclauses the behaviour is described
for the non transient service states. It should be noted that after
procedures in RR connected mode, e.g. location updating procedures,
subclause 4.2.3 applies which specifies the selection of the MM idle
state. Furthermore when in sub-state NORMAL SERVICE, if a PLMN selection
is requested, the MS enters sub-state SEARCH FOR PLMN, NORMAL SERVICE.

#### 4.2.2.1 Service State, NORMAL SERVICE

When in state MM IDLE and service state NORMAL SERVICE, the mobile
station shall:

\- provided that T3246 is not running, perform normal location updating
when a new location area is entered;

\- perform location updating procedure at expiry of timer T3211 or
T3213;

\- perform periodic updating at expiration of timer T3212;

\- perform IMSI detach;

\- provided that T3246 is not running, support requests from the CM
layer;

\- support request for emergency calls;

\- respond to paging; and

\- for an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in USIM), perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of
timer T3242 or timer T3243.

In addition, mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS listening
shall:

\- indicate notifications to the GCC or BCC sublayer;

\- respond to notification if the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the
reception of a voice group or broadcast call for which no channel
description has been received in the notification by the RR sublayer;

\- request the RR sublayer to receive a voice group or broadcast call if
the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the reception of a voice group or
broadcast call for which a channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer and then go to the service state
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE).

#### 4.2.2.2 Service State, ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE

When in state MM IDLE and service state ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE the mobile
station shall:

\- perform location updating procedure at expiry of timer T3211, T3213
or T3246;

\- perform normal location updating when entering a new PLMN, if timer
T3246 is running and the new PLMN is not equivalent to the PLMN where
the MS started timer T3246;

\- perform normal location updating when the location area
identification of the serving cell changes, if timer T3246 is not
running;

\- if entry into this state was caused by c) or d) or f) (with cause
different from \"abnormal release, unspecified\") or g) (with cause
\"retry upon entry into a new cell\") of subclause 4.4.4.9, then
location updating shall be performed when a new cell is entered;

\- if entry into this state was caused by e) or f) (with cause
\"abnormal release, unspecified\"), g) (with cause different from
\"retry upon entry into a new cell\"), i) or j) of subclause 4.4.4.9,
then location updating shall not be performed because a new cell is
entered;

\- perform normal location updating at expiry of timer T3212;

\- not perform IMSI detach unless timer T3246 is running and the
location area of the current cell is same as the stored location area;

\- support request for emergency calls;

\- use other request from CM layer as triggering of normal location
updating procedure (if the location updating procedure is successful,
then the request for MM connection is accepted, see subclause 4.5.1), if
timer T3246 is not running;

\- respond to paging, if timer T3246 is running and the location area of
the current cell is same as the stored location area;

\- respond to paging (with IMSI) ; and

\- for an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in USIM), perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of
timer T3242 or timer T3243.

In addition, mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS listening
shall:

\- indicate notifications to the GCC or BCC sublayer for which a channel
description has been received in the notification by the RR sublayer;

\- reject requests of the GCC or BCC sublayer to respond to
notifications for which no channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer;

\- request the RR sublayer to receive a voice group or broadcast call if
the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the reception of a voice group or
broadcast call for which a channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer and then go to the service state
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE).

#### 4.2.2.3 Service State, LIMITED SERVICE

When in state MM IDLE and service state LIMITED SERVICE the mobile
station shall:

\- not perform periodic updating;

\- not perform IMSI detach;

\- reject any requests from CM entities for MM connections except for
emergency calls;

\- perform normal location updating when a cell is entered which may
provide normal service (e.g. location area not in one of the forbidden
LAI lists.); and

\- for an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in USIM), perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of
timer T3242 or timer T3243.

When in state MM IDLE and service state LIMITED SERVICE the mobile
station may:

\- respond to paging (with IMSI);

In addition, mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS listening
shall:

\- indicate notifications to the GCC or BCC sublayer for which a channel
description has been received in the notification by the RR sublayer;

\- reject requests of the GCC or BCC sublayer to respond to
notifications for which no channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer;

\- request the RR sublayer to receive a voice group or broadcast call if
the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the reception of a voice group or
broadcast call for which a channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer and then go to the service state
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE).

#### 4.2.2.4 Service State, NO IMSI

When in state MM IDLE and service state NO IMSI the mobile station shall
(see subclause 3.2, 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\]):

\- not start any normal location updating attempt;

\- not perform periodic updating;

\- not perform IMSI detach if powered down;

\- reject any request from CM entities for MM connections except for
emergency calls;

\- not respond to paging;

\- only perform default cell selection.

In addition, mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS listening
shall:

\- not indicate notifications to the GCC or BCC layer.

#### 4.2.2.5 Service State, SEARCH FOR PLMN, NORMAL SERVICE

When in state MM IDLE and service state SEARCH FOR PLMN, NORMAL SERVICE
the mobile station shall:

\- if timer T3211 or T3213 expires in this state perform a location
updating procedure at the latest if and when back to NORMAL SERVICE
state and if the cell is not changed;

\- if timer T3212 expires in this state perform a periodic location
updating procedure at the latest if and when back to NORMAL SERVICE
state;

\- perform IMSI detach;

\- support requests from the CM layer;

\- listen as far as possible to paging, and respond; and

\- for an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in USIM), perform the eCall inactivity procedure at expiry of
timer T3242 or T3243.

In addition, mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS listening
shall:

\- listen as far as possible to notifications and indicate notifications
to the GCC or BCC layer;

\- respond to notification if the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the
reception of a voice group or broadcast call for which no channel
description has been received in the notification by the RR sublayer;

\- request the RR sublayer to receive a voice group or broadcast call if
the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the reception of a voice group or
broadcast call for which a channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer.

#### 4.2.2.6 Service State, SEARCH FOR PLMN

When in state MM IDLE and service state SEARCH FOR PLMN the mobile
station shall:

\- not start any normal location updating attempt;

\- not perform periodic updating;

\- not perform IMSI detach if powered down;

\- reject any request from CM entities for MM connections except
emergency calls;

\- not respond to paging.

#### 4.2.2.7 Service State, RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE)

Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS
listening:

When in state MM IDLE and service state RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL
SERVICE), the mobile station shall:

\- perform normal location updating when a new location area is entered;

\- perform location updating procedure at expiry of timer T3211 or
T3213;

\- perform periodic updating at expiration of timer T3212;

\- perform IMSI detach;

\- support requests from the GCC or BCC layers;

\- indicate notifications or paging information to the GCC or BCC layer;

\- respond to notification if the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the
reception of a voice group or broadcast call for which no channel
description has been received in the notification by the RR sublayer;

\- request the RR sublayer to receive another voice group or broadcast
call if the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the reception of a voice group
or broadcast call for which a channel description has been received in
the notification by the RR sublayer.

#### 4.2.2.8 Service State, RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE)

Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS
listening:

When in state MM IDLE and service state RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED
SERVICE), the mobile station shall:

\- not perform periodic updating;

\- not perform IMSI detach;

\- reject any requests from CM entities for MM connections except for
emergency calls;

\- perform normal location updating when a cell is entered which may
provide normal service (e.g. location area not in one of the forbidden
LAI lists.);

\- it may respond to paging (with IMSI);

\- indicate notifications to the GCC or BCC sublayer for which a channel
description has been received in the notification by the RR sublayer;

\- reject requests of the GCC or BCC sublayer to respond to
notifications for which no channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer;

\- request the RR sublayer to receive a voice group or broadcast call if
the GCC or BCC sublayer requests the reception of a voice group or
broadcast call for which a channel description has been received in the
notification by the RR sublayer and then go to the service state
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE).

#### 4.2.2.9 Service State, eCALL INACTIVE 

When in state MM IDLE and service state eCALL INACTIVE, the mobile
station shall:

\- not perform periodic updating;

\- not perform IMSI detach;

\- reject any requests from CM entities for MM connections except for
emergency calls and calls to a non-emergency MSISDN for test and
terminal reconfiguration services;

\- not perform normal location updating; and

\- not respond to paging.

### 4.2.3 Service state when back to state MM IDLE from another state

When returning to MM IDLE, e.g., after a location updating procedure,
the mobile station selects the cell as specified in
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]. With one exception,
this is a normal cell selection.

An eCall only mobile station (as determined by information configured in
USIM), shall start timer T3242 if the return to MM IDLE state is the
result of an emergency services call and shall start timer T3243 if the
return to MM IDLE state is the result of a call to a non-emergency
MSISDN for test and terminal reconfiguration services, as described in
subclause 4.4.7.

If this return to idle state is not subsequent to a location updating
procedure terminated with reception of cause \"Roaming not allowed in
this location area\", the service state depends on the result of the
cell selection procedure, on the update status of the mobile station, on
the location data stored in the mobile station and on the presence of
the SIM/USIM:

\- if no cell has been found, the state is NO CELL AVAILABLE, until a
cell is found;

\- if no SIM/USIM is present, or if the inserted SIM/USIM is considered
invalid by the MS, the state is NO IMSI;

\- for an eCall only mobile station (as determined by information
configured in USIM), if timer T3242 or timer T3243 has expired and
service state PLMN SEARCH is not required, the state is eCALL INACTIVE
and the eCall inactivity procedure is performed as described in
subclause 4.4.7;

\- if the selected cell is in the location area where the MS is
registered, then the state is NORMAL SERVICE; it shall be noted that
this also includes an abnormal case described in subclause 4.4.4.9;

\- (Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS
listening.) if the mobile stations was in the service state RECEIVING
GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE) or RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE)
before the location updating procedure and the selected cell is in the
location area where the mobile station is registered, then the state is
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE);

\- if the selected cell is in a location area where the mobile station
is not registered but in which the MS is allowed to attempt a location
update, then the state is LOCATION UPDATE NEEDED;

\- if the selected cell is in a location area where the mobile station
is not allowed to attempt a location update, then the state is LIMITED
SERVICE;

\- if the selected cell is a CSG cell whose CSG ID and associated PLMN
identity are not in the Allowed CSG list or in the Operator CSG list
stored in the MS, then the state is LIMITED SERVICE;

\- (Only applicable for MSs supporting VGCS listening or VBS listening.)
if the MSs was in the service state RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL
SERVICE) or RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE) before the location
updating procedure and the selected cell is in the location area where
the MS is not allowed to attempt a location update, then the state is
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (LIMITED SERVICE);

\- after some abnormal cases occurring during an unsuccessful location
updating procedure, as described in subclause 4.4.4.9, the state is
ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE.

In case of a return from a location updating procedure to which was
answered \"Roaming not allowed in this location area\", the service
state PLMN SEARCH is entered as specified in subclause 4.2.1.2.

### 4.2.4 Behaviour in state GMM-DEREGISTERED

The state GMM-DEREGISTERED is entered when:

\- the MS is switched on;

\- the GPRS capability has been enabled in the MS;

\- a GPRS detach or combined GPRS detach procedure has been performed;

\- a GMM procedure has failed (except routing area updating, see
subclause 4.7.5); or

\- the MS attached for emergency bearer services is in PMM-IDLE mode and
its periodic routing area update timer expires (see subclause 4.7.2.2).

The selection of the appropriate substate of GMM-DEREGISTERED after
switching on is described in subclause 4.2.4.1. The specific behaviour
of the MS in state GMM-DEREGISTERED is described in subclause 4.2.4.2.
The substate chosen when the GMM-DEREGISTERED state is returned to from
another state except state GMM-NULL is described in subclause 4.2.4.3.

It should be noted that transitions between the various substates of
GMM-DEREGISTERED are caused by (e.g.):

\- insertion or removal of the SIM/USIM;

\- cell selection/reselection (see also 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP
TS 25.304 \[98\]);

\- PLMN search;

\- loss/regain of coverage; or

\- change of RA.

How various GMM procedures affect the GMM-DEREGISTERED substates and the
GPRS update status is described in the detailed description of the GMM
procedures in subclause 4.7.

#### 4.2.4.1 Primary substate selection

##### 4.2.4.1.1 Selection of the substate after power on or enabling the MS\'s GPRS capability

When the MS is switched on, the substate shall be PLMN-SEARCH in case
the SIM/USIM is inserted and valid. See 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] and
3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\] for further details.

When the GPRS capability in an activated MS has been enabled, the
selection of the GMM-DEREGISTERED substate depends on the MM state and
the GPRS update status.

The substate chosen after PLMN-SEARCH, in case of power on or after
enabling of the GPRS capability is:

\- if the cell is not supporting GPRS, the substate shall be
NO-CELL-AVAILABLE;

\- if no SIM/USIM is present the substate shall be NO-IMSI;

\- if a suitable cell supporting GPRS has been found and the PLMN or LA
is not in the forbidden list, then the substate shall be NORMAL-SERVICE;

\- if the selected cell supporting GPRS is in a forbidden PLMN, is in a
forbidden LA, or is a CSG cell with a CSG ID and associated PLMN
identity that are not in Allowed CSG list or in the Operator CSG list
stored in the MS , then the MS shall enter the substate LIMITED-SERVICE;

\- if the MS is in manual network selection mode and no cell supporting
GPRS of the selected PLMN has been found, the MS shall enter the
substate NO-CELL-AVAILABLE.

##### 4.2.4.1.2 Other Cases

When the MM state is IDLE, the GMM substate PLMN-SEARCH shall also be
entered in the following cases:

\- when a SIM/USIM is inserted in substate NO-IMSI;

\- when the user has asked for a PLMN selection in any substate except
NO IMSI and NO CELL AVAILABLE ;

\- when coverage is lost in any substate except NO IMSI and NO CELL
AVAILABLE ;

\- Roaming is denied;

\- optionally, when the MS is in automatic network selection mode and
the maximum allowed number of consecutive unsuccessful attach attempts
controlled by the GPRS attach attempt counter (subclause 4.7.3) have
been performed.

#### 4.2.4.2 Detailed description of the MS behaviour in state GMM-DEREGISTERED

In state GMM-DEREGISTERED, the MS shall behave according to the
substate. In the following subclauses, the behaviour is described for
the non transient substates.

##### 4.2.4.2.1 Substate, NORMAL-SERVICE

The MS shall:

\- initiate GPRS attach.

##### 4.2.4.2.2 Substate, ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH

The MS:

\- shall initiate GPRS attach on the expiry of timers T3311, T3302, or
T3346;

\- shall initiate GPRS attach when entering a new PLMN, if timer T3346
is running and the new PLMN is not equivalent to the PLMN where the MS
started timer T3346, the PLMN identity of the new cell is not in one of
the forbidden PLMN lists and the location area this cell is belonging to
is not in one of the lists of forbidden LAs;

\- may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu mode
only) even if timer T3346 is running;

\- shall initiate GPRS attach when the routing area of the serving cell
has changed, if timer T3346 is not running, the PLMN identity of the new
cell is not in one of the forbidden PLMN lists and the location area
this cell is belonging to is not in one of the lists of forbidden LAs;

\- shall if entry into this state was caused by b) or d) with cause
\"Retry upon entry into a new cell\" of subclause 4.7.3.1.5, perform
GPRS attach when a new cell is entered;

\- shall if entry into this state was caused by c) or d) with cause
different from \"Retry upon entry into a new cell\" of
subclause 4.7.3.1.5, not perform GPRS attach when a new cell is entered;

\- shall use requests for non-GPRS services from CM layers to trigger
the combined GPRS attach procedure, if timer T3346 is not running and
the network operates in network operation mode I. Depending on which of
the timers T3311 or T3302 is running the MS shall stop the relevant
timer and act as if the stopped timer has expired; and

\- may initiate GPRS attach upon request of the upper layers to
establish a PDN connection for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu mode
only), if timer T3346 is not running.

##### 4.2.4.2.3 Substate, LIMITED-SERVICE

The MS:

\- shall initiate GPRS attach when a cell is entered which may provide
normal service (e.g. location area is not in one of the forbidden
lists); and

\- may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu mode
only).

##### 4.2.4.2.4 Substate, NO-IMSI

The MS:

\- shall perform default cell selection; and

\- may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu mode
only).

##### 4.2.4.2.5 Substate, NO-CELL

The MS shall:

\- perform cell selection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] and shall choose an appropriate substate.

##### 4.2.4.2.6 Substate, PLMN-SEARCH

The MS shall perform PLMN selection. If a new PLMN is selected, the MS
shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter and initiate the GPRS attach
procedure (see subclause 4.7.3.1).

If the selected cell is known not to be able to provide normal service,
the MS may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu
mode only).

##### 4.2.4.2.7 Substate, ATTACH-NEEDED

The MS shall start a GPRS attach procedure if still needed as soon as
the access class control allows network contact in the selected cell.

The MS may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu
mode only).

##### 4.2.4.2.8 Substate, SUSPENDED (A/Gb mode only)

The MS:

\- shall not send any user data; and

\- shall not send any signalling information.

#### 4.2.4.3 Substate when back to state GMM-DEREGISTERED from another GMM state

When returning to state GMM-DEREGISTERED, the MS shall select a cell as
specified in 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

The substate depends on the result of the cell selection procedure, the
outcome of the previously performed GMM specific procedures, on the GPRS
update status of the MS, on the location area data stored in the MS and
on the presence of the SIM/USIM:

\- if no cell has been found, the substate is NO-CELL-AVAILABLE, until a
cell is found;

\- if no SIM/USIM is present or if the inserted SIM/USIM is considered
invalid by the MS, the substate shall be NO-IMSI;

\- if a suitable cell supporting GPRS has been found and the PLMN or LA
is not in the forbidden list, the substate shall be NORMAL-SERVICE;

\- if a GPRS attach shall be performed (e.g. network requested
reattach), the substate shall be ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH;

\- if a PLMN reselection (according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]) is needed,
the substate shall be PLMN SEARCH;

\- if the selected cell is known not to be able to provide normal
service, the substate shall be LIMITED-SERVICE.

### 4.2.5 Behaviour in state GMM-REGISTERED

The state GMM-REGISTERED is entered when:

\- a GMM context is established, i.e. the MS is IMSI attached for GPRS
services only or for GPRS and non-GPRS services.

The specific behaviour of the MS in state GMM-REGISTERED is described in
subclause 4.2.5.1. The primary substate when entering the state
GMM-REGISTERED is always NORMAL-SERVICE.

It should be noted that transitions between the various substates of
GMM-REGISTERED are caused by (e.g.):

\- cell selection/reselection (see also 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]);

\- change of RA;

\- loss/regain of coverage.

How various GMM procedures affect the GMM-REGISTERED substates is
described in the detailed description of the procedures in
subclause 4.7.

#### 4.2.5.1 Detailed description of the MS behaviour in state GMM-REGISTERED 

In state GMM-REGISTERED, the MS shall behave according to the substate
as explained below.

##### 4.2.5.1.1 Substate, NORMAL-SERVICE

The MS shall:

\- perform cell selection/reselection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\]
and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\];

\- initiate normal routing area updating;

\- perform periodic routing area updating except when attached for
emergency bearer services (see subclause 4.7.2.2); and

\- receive and transmit user data and signalling information.

GPRS MSs in operation modes C or A shall answer to paging requests.

GPRS MS in operation mode B may answer to paging requests.

##### 4.2.5.1.2 Substate, SUSPENDED (A/Gb mode only)

The MS:

\- shall not send any user data;

\- shall not send any signalling information; and

\- shall not perform cell-updates.

##### 4.2.5.1.3 Substate, UPDATE-NEEDED

The MS shall:

\- not send any user data;

\- not send any signalling information, unless for a routing area update
procedure upon request of the upper layers to establish a PDN connection
for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu mode only);

\- perform cell selection/reselection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\]
and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]; and

\- choose the appropriate new substate depending on the GPRS update
status as soon as the access class control allows network contact in the
selected cell.

##### 4.2.5.1.4 Substate, ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE

The MS:

\- shall not send any user data;

\- shall initiate routing area updating procedure on the expiry of
timers T3311, T3302 or T3346;

\- shall initiate routing area updating procedure when entering a new
PLMN, if timer T3346 is running and the new PLMN is not equivalent to
the PLMN where the MS started timer T3346, the PLMN identity of the new
cell is not in one of the forbidden PLMN lists and the location area
this cell is belonging to is not in one of the lists of forbidden LAs;

\- shall initiate routing area updating procedure when the routing area
of the serving cell has changed, if timer T3346 is not running, the PLMN
identity of the new cell is not in one of the forbidden PLMN lists and
the location area this cell is belonging to is not in one of the lists
of forbidden LAs;

\- shall, if entry into this state was caused by b) or d) with cause
\"Retry upon entry into a new cell\" of subclause 4.7.5.1.5, initiate
routing area updating procedure when a new cell is entered;

\- shall, if entry into this state was caused by c) or d) with cause
different from \"Retry upon entry into a new cell\" of
subclause 4.7.5.1.5, not initiate routing area updating procedure when a
new cell is entered;

\- shall use request for non-GPRS services from CM layers to trigger the
combined routing area updating procedure, if timer T3346 is not running
and the network operates in network operation mode I. Depending on which
of the timers T3311 or T3302 is running the MS shall stop the relevant
timer and act as if the stopped timer has expired;

\- may use a request for an MMTEL voice call or MMTEL video call from
the upper layers to initiate routing area updating procedure (Iu mode
only), if timer T3346 is not running;

\- may initiate routing area updating procedure upon request of the
upper layers to establish a PDN connection for emergency bearer services
(UTRAN Iu mode only);

\- shall initiate routing area updating procedure upon request of the
upper layers to establish a PDN connection without the NAS signalling
low priority indication as specified in subclause 4.7.5.1.5, item j), if
timer T3346 is running due to a NAS request message (ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST) which contained the low priority indicator
set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\"and timer
T3302 and timer T3311 are not running;

\- may detach locally and initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer
services even if timer T3346 is running;

\- shall initiate routing area updating procedure in response to paging,
if timer T3346 is running; and

\- shall not initiate the signalling procedure for GPRS detach unless
timer T3346 is running and the routing area of the current cell is same
as the stored routing area.

##### 4.2.5.1.5 Substate, NO-CELL-AVAILABLE

The MS shall perform cell selection/reselection according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]. If PSM is active, the
MS can deactivate PSM at any time by activating the AS layer when the MS
needs to send mobile originated signalling or user data.

##### 4.2.5.1.6 Substate, LIMITED-SERVICE

The MS:

\- shall perform cell selection/reselection according to 3GPP TS 43.022
\[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\];

\- may respond to paging (with IMSI); and

\- may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu mode
only).

##### 4.2.5.1.7 Substate, ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM

The MS shall:

\- perform cell selection/reselection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\]
and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\];

\- receive and transmit user data and signalling information;

\- initiate routing area update indicating \"combined RA/LA updating
with IMSI attach\" on the expiry of timers T3311 or T3302;

\- initiate routing area update indicating \"combined RA/LA updating
with IMSI attach\" when the routing area of the serving cell has changed
and the location area this cell is belonging to is not in the list of
forbidden LAs.

GPRS MSs in operation modes C or A shall answer to paging requests.

GPRS MS in operation mode B may answer to paging requests.

##### 4.2.5.1.8 Substate, PLMN-SEARCH

When the MM state is IDLE, the GMM substate PLMN-SEARCH may be entered
if the MS is in automatic network selection mode and the maximum allowed
number of consecutive unsuccessful routing area update attempts
controlled by the GPRS routing area updating attempt counter
(subclause 4.7.5) have been performed. If a new PLMN is selected, the MS
shall reset the routing area updating attempt counter and perform the
routing area updating procedure.

If the selected cell is known not to be able to provide normal service,
the MS may initiate GPRS attach for emergency bearer services (UTRAN Iu
mode only).

4.3 MM common procedures
------------------------

As described in subclause 4.1.1, a MM common procedure can be initiated
at any time whilst a RR connection exists between the network and the
mobile station.

### 4.3.1 TMSI reallocation procedure

#### 4.3.1.0 General

The purpose of the TMSI reallocation procedure is to provide identity
confidentiality, i.e. to protect a user against being identified and
located by an intruder (see 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\], 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]
and 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]).

If the identity confidentiality service is applied for an IMSI, a
Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity (TMSI) is used for identification
within the radio interface signalling procedures.

In a network supporting the feature \'Intra domain connection of RAN
nodes to multiple CN nodes\' a TMSI shall be allocated to each IMSI
attached mobile station. See 3GPP TS 23.236 \[94\], subclause 4.3.

The structure of the TMSI is specified in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]. The
TMSI has significance only within a location area. Outside the location
area it has to be combined with the Location Area Identifier (LAI) to
provide for an unambiguous identity.

Usually the TMSI reallocation is performed at least at each change of a
location area. (Such choices are left to the network operator).

The reallocation of a TMSI can be performed either by a unique procedure
defined in this subclause or implicitly by a location updating procedure
using the TMSI. The implicit reallocation of a TMSI is described
together with that procedure.

If a TMSI provided by a mobile station is unknown in the network e.g.
due to a data base failure, the network may require the mobile station
to provide its International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI). In this
case the identification procedure (see subclause 4.3.3) should be used
before the TMSI reallocation procedure may be initiated.

The TMSI reallocation can be initiated by the network at any time whilst
a RR connection exists between the network and the mobile station.

NOTE 1: Usually the TMSI reallocation is performed in ciphered mode.

NOTE 2: Normally the TMSI reallocation will take place in conjunction
with another procedure, e.g. at location updating or at call setup (see
3GPP TS 29.002 \[37\]).

NOTE 3: The explicit TMSI reallocation procedure is started by the
network only if the mobile station is updated in the current location
area or if a location updating procedure is ongoing for that particular
mobile station, or if the network wishes to send a non-broadcast LAI
according to 3GPP TS 23.236 \[94\] to the mobile station.

#### 4.3.1.1 TMSI reallocation initiation by the network

The network initiates the TMSI reallocation procedure by sending a TMSI
REALLOCATION COMMAND message to the mobile station and starts the timer
T3250.

The TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message contains a new combination of TMSI
and LAI allocated by the network or a LAI and the IMSI if the used TMSI
shall be deleted. Usually the TMSI-REALLOCATION COMMAND message is sent
to the mobile station using a RR connection in ciphered mode (see
3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]).

#### 4.3.1.2 TMSI reallocation completion by the mobile station

Upon receipt of the TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message the mobile
station:

a\) shall stores the Location Area Identifier (LAI) in the SIM/USIM;

b\) shall enter the sub-state NORMAL SERVICE if the MS is in the
sub-state ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE;

c\) if the received identity is the IMSI of the relevant mobile station,
shall delete any TMSI;

d\) if the received identity is a TMSI, shall store the TMSI in the
SIM/USIM; and

e\) shall send a TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE message to the network.

#### 4.3.1.3 TMSI reallocation completion in the network.

Upon receipt of the TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE message, the network
stops the timer T3250 and either considers the new TMSI as valid or, if
an IMSI was sent to the mobile station, considers the old TMSI as
deleted.

If the RR connection is no more needed, then the network will request
the RR sublayer to release it (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.5
and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

#### 4.3.1.4 Abnormal cases in the mobile station

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) RR connection failure:

The mobile station shall consider the new TMSI and new LAI, if any, as
valid and the old TMSI and old LAI as deleted as soon as a TMSI
REALLOCATION COMMAND message or another message containing a new TMSI
(e.g. LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message) is correctly received. Any RR
connection failure at a later stage shall not have any impact on the
TMSI and LAI storage.

#### 4.3.1.5 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) RR connection failure:

If the RR connection is lost before the TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE
message is received, the network shall release all MM connections, if
any. Furthermore, the network should consider both the old and the new
TMSI as occupied for a certain recovery time.

During this period the network:

\- may use the IMSI for paging or network originated transactions on the
CM layer. Upon response from the mobile station the TMSI reallocation
procedure shall be restarted;

\- may consider the new TMSI as valid if it is used by the mobile
station; or

\- may use the identification procedure followed by a new TMSI
reallocation procedure, if the mobile station uses the old TMSI (see
subclause 4.3.3).

Other implementations are possible, e.g. the network may page with the
old TMSI.

b\) Expiry of timer T3250:

The TMSI reallocation procedure is supervised by the timer T3250 (see
example in figure 4.1). At expiry of timer T3250 the network may release
the RR connection. In this case, the network shall abort the
reallocation procedure release all MM connections if any, and follow the
rules for the case a as described above.

![](media/image7.png){width="3.9166666666666665in"
height="0.9583333333333334in"}

Figure 4.1/3GPP TS 24.008: TMSI reallocation sequence

### 4.3.2 Authentication procedure

#### 4.3.2a Authentication procedure used for a UMTS authentication challenge

The purpose of the authentication procedure is fourfold (see
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]):

First to permit the network to check whether the identity provided by
the mobile station is acceptable or not;

Second to provide parameters enabling the mobile station to calculate a
new UMTS ciphering key;

Third to provide parameters enabling the mobile station to calculate a
new UMTS integrity key;

Fourth to permit the mobile station to authenticate the network.

The cases where the authentication procedure should be used are defined
in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

The UMTS authentication procedure is always initiated and controlled by
the network. However, there is the possibility for the MS to reject the
UMTS authentication challenge sent by the network.

The MS shall support the UMTS authentication challenge, if a USIM is
inserted.

A UMTS security context is established in the MS and the network when a
UMTS authentication challenge is performed in A/Gb mode or in Iu mode.
After a successful UMTS authentication, the UMTS ciphering key, the UMTS
integrity key, the GSM ciphering key and the ciphering key sequence
number, are stored both in the network and the MS. Furthermore, in A/Gb
mode both the ME and the network may derive and store a GSM Kc~128~ as
part of the UMTS security context as described in the
subclause 4.3.2.3a.

#### 4.3.2b Authentication Procedure used for a GSM authentication challenge

The purpose of the authentication procedure is twofold (see
3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]):

First to permit the network to check whether the identity provided by
the mobile station is acceptable or not;

Second to provide parameters enabling the mobile station to calculate a
new GSM ciphering key.

The cases where the authentication procedure should be used are defined
in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\].

The authentication procedure is always initiated and controlled by the
network. GSM authentication challenge shall be supported by a ME
supporting GERAN or UTRAN.

A GSM security context is established in the MS and the network when a
GSM authentication challenge is performed in A/Gb mode or in Iu mode.
However, in Iu mode the MS shall not accept a GSM authentication
challenge, if a USIM is inserted. After a successful GSM authentication,
the GSM ciphering key and the ciphering key sequence number, are stored
both in the network and the MS.

#### 4.3.2.1 Authentication request by the network

The network initiates the authentication procedure by transferring an
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message across the radio interface and starts the
timer T3260. The AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message contains the parameters
necessary to calculate the response parameters (see
3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] (in case of GSM authentication challenge) and
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] (in case of an UMTS authentication challenge)).

In a GSM authentication challenge, the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message
also contains the GSM ciphering key sequence number allocated to the key
which may be computed from the given parameters.

In a UMTS authentication challenge, the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message
also contains the ciphering key sequence number allocated to the key set
of UMTS ciphering key, UMTS integrity key and GSM ciphering key which
may be computed from the given parameters. Furthermore, the ciphering
key sequence number is also linked to a GSM Kc~128~ if after the
authentication procedure the network in A/Gb mode selects an A5
ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key.

#### 4.3.2.2 Authentication response by the mobile station

The mobile station shall be ready to respond upon an AUTHENTICATION
REQUEST message at any time whilst a RR connection exists. With
exception of the cases described in subclause 4.3.2.5.1, it shall
process the challenge information and send back an AUTHENTICATION
RESPONSE message to the network.

If a SIM is inserted in the MS, the MS shall ignore the Authentication
Parameter AUTN IE if included in the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message and
shall proceed as in case of a GSM authentication challenge. It shall not
perform the authentication of the network described in
subclause 4.3.2.5.1.

In a GSM authentication challenge, the new GSM ciphering key calculated
from the challenge information shall overwrite the previous GSM
ciphering key and any previously stored UMTS ciphering key and UMTS
integrity key shall be deleted. The new GSM ciphering key shall be
stored on the SIM/USIM together with the ciphering key sequence number.

In a UMTS authentication challenge, the new UMTS ciphering key, the new
GSM ciphering key and the new UMTS integrity key calculated from the
challenge information shall overwrite the previous UMTS ciphering key,
GSM ciphering key and UMTS integrity key. The new UMTS ciphering key,
GSM ciphering key and UMTS integrity key are stored on the USIM together
with the ciphering key sequence number. Furthermore, in A/Gb mode when
after the authentication procedure an A5 ciphering algorithm that
requires a 128-bit ciphering key is taken into use, then a new GSM
Kc~128~ shall also be calculated as described in the subclause 4.3.2.3a.

The SIM/USIM will provide the mobile station with the authentication
response, based upon the authentication challenge given from the ME. A
UMTS authentication challenge will result in the USIM passing a RES to
the ME. A GSM authentication challenge will result in the SIM/USIM
passing a SRES to the ME.

A ME supporting UMTS authentication challenge may support the following
procedure:

In order to avoid a synchronisation failure, when the mobile station
receives an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the mobile station shall
store the received RAND together with the RES returned from the USIM in
the volatile memory and associate it with CS domain. When the MS
receives a subsequent AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, if the stored RAND
value for the CS domain is equal to the new received value in the
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, then the mobile station shall not pass
the RAND to the USIM, but shall immediately send the AUTHENTICATION
RESPONSE message with the stored RES for the CS domain. If, for the CS
domain, there is no valid stored RAND in the mobile station or the
stored RAND is different from the new received value in the
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the mobile station shall pass the RAND
to the USIM, shall override any previously stored RAND and RES with the
new ones and start, or reset and restart timer T3218.

The RAND and RES values stored in the mobile station shall be deleted
and timer T3218, if running, shall be stopped:

\- upon receipt of a SECURITY MODE COMMAND (Iu mode only),\
CIPHERING MODE COMMAND (A/Gb mode only),\
CM\_SERVICE\_ACCEPT,\
CM\_SERVICE\_REJECT,\
LOCATION\_UPDATING\_ACCEPT\
or AUTHENTICATION REJECT message;

\- upon expiry of timer T3218; or

\- if the mobile station enters the MM state MM IDLE or NULL.

#### 4.3.2.3 Authentication processing in the network

Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message, the network stops
the timer T3260 and checks the validity of the response (see
3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] in case of a GSM authentication challenge
respective 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] in case of an UMTS authentication
challenge).

Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, the network stops
the timer T3260. In Synch failure case, the core network may renegotiate
with the HLR/AuC and provide the MS with new authentication parameters.

#### 4.3.2.3a 128-bit circuit-switched GSM ciphering key

The ME and the network may derive and store a 128-bit circuit-switched
GSM ciphering key or GSM Kc~128~ from an established UMTS security
context. If the GSM Kc~128~ exists, then it is also part of the UMTS
security context.

The ME with a USIM in use shall compute a new GSM Kc~128~ using the UMTS
ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key from an established UMTS
security context as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The new GSM
Kc~128~ shall be stored only in the ME. The ME shall overwrite the
existing GSM Kc~128~ with the new GSM Kc~128~. The ME shall delete the
GSM Kc~128~ at switch off, when the USIM is disabled as well as under
the conditions identified in the subclause 4.1.2.2 and 4.3.2.4. The ME
with a USIM in use shall apply the GSM Kc~128~ when in A/Gb mode an A5
ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key is taken into
use.

The network shall compute the GSM Kc~128~ using the UMTS integrity key
and the UMTS ciphering key from an established UMTS security context as
specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] only when in A/Gb mode an A5
ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key is to be used.

#### 4.3.2.4 Ciphering key sequence number

The security parameters for authentication and ciphering are tied
together in sets.

In a GSM authentication challenge, from a challenge parameter RAND both
the authentication response parameter SRES and the GSM ciphering key can
be computed given the secret key associated to the IMSI.

In a UMTS authentication challenge, from a challenge parameter RAND, the
authentication response parameter RES and the UMTS ciphering key and the
UMTS integrity key can be computed given the secret key associated to
the IMSI. In addition, in the USIM a GSM ciphering key can be computed
from the UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key by means of an
unkeyed conversion function. Furthermore, in A/Gb mode if an A5
ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key is taken into
use, then a GSM Kc~128~ shall also be calculated as described in the
subclause 4.3.2.3a.

In order to allow start of ciphering on a RR connection without
authentication, the ciphering key sequence numbers are introduced. The
ciphering key sequence number is managed by the network in the way that
the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message contains the ciphering key sequence
number allocated to the GSM ciphering key (in case of a GSM
authentication challenge) or the UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS
integrity key (in case of a UMTS authentication challenge) which may be
computed from the RAND parameter carried in that message.

If an authentication procedure has been completed successfully and a
ciphering key sequence number is stored in the network, the network
shall include a different ciphering key sequence number in the
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message when it intiates a new authentication
procedure.

The mobile station stores the ciphering key sequence number with the GSM
ciphering key (in case of a GSM authentication challenge) and the UMTS
ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key (in case of a UMTS
authentication challenge) and indicates to the network in the first
message (LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST, CM SERVICE REQUEST, PAGING RESPONSE,
CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST) which ciphering key sequence number the
stored GSM ciphering key (in case of a GSM authentication challenge) or
set of UMTS ciphering, UMTS integrity, derived GSM ciphering key, and
potentially the derived GSM Kc~128~ (in case of a UMTS authentication
challenge) has.

When the deletion of the ciphering key sequence number is described this
also means that the associated GSM ciphering key, the UMTS ciphering key
and the UMTS integrity key shall be considered as invalid and also the
GSM Kc~128~ shall be deleted if any (i.e. the established GSM security
context or the UMTS security context is no longer valid).

In A/Gb mode, the network may choose to start ciphering with the stored
GSM ciphering key or GSM Kc~128~ (under the restrictions given in
3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\]) if the stored ciphering key sequence number and
the one given from the mobile station are equal.

NOTE 1: The decision of starting ciphering with the GSM ciphering key or
the GSM Kc~128~ depends on whether the network indicates in the
CIPHERING MODE COMMAND message an A5 ciphering algorithm which requires
a 64 or 128-bit ciphering key as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In Iu mode, the network may choose to start ciphering and integrity with
the stored UMTS ciphering key and UMTS integrity key (under the
restrictions given in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\] and 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]) if
the stored ciphering key sequence number and the one given from the
mobile station are equal.

NOTE 2: In some specifications the term KSI (Key Set Identifier) might
be used instead of the term ciphering key sequence number.

#### 4.3.2.5 Authentication not accepted by the network

If the authentication response (RES or SRES) is not valid, the network
response depends upon the type of identity used by the mobile station in
the first message, that is:

\- the TMSI was used; or

\- the IMSI was used.

If the TMSI has been used, the network may decide to initiate the
identification procedure. If the IMSI given by the mobile station then
differs from the one the network had associated with the TMSI, the
authentication should be restarted with the correct parameters. If the
IMSI provided by the MS is the expected one (i.e. authentication has
really failed), the network should send an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message
to the mobile station.

If the IMSI has been used, or the network decides not to try the
identification procedure, an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message should be
transferred to the mobile station.

After having sent this message, all MM connections in progress (if any)
are released and the network should initiate the RR connection release
procedure described in subclause 3.5.of 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] (A/Gb mode
only), 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] (UTRAN Iu mode only), or in
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\] (GERAN Iu mode only).

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message,

a\) if the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower
layers, the mobile station shall set the update status in the SIM/USIM
to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, delete from the SIM/USIM the stored TMSI, LAI
and ciphering key sequence number. The SIM/USIM shall be considered as
invalid until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the MS
maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS
services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value. If the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set
this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

b\) if the message is received without integrity protection, then the MS
shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the
range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running
(see subclause 4.1.1.6A). Additionally, the MS shall:

\- if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in
subclause 4.1.1.6A, list item 1.a) for the case a LOCATION UPDATING
REJECT message is received without integrity protection. Additionally,
if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\", then the MS shall increment this counter; and

\- otherwise proceed as specified under list item a) above for the case
that the message has been successfully checked by the lower layers.

List item b) above is also applicable, if the message is received in
A/Gb mode.

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received in the state IMSI
DETACH INITIATED the mobile station shall follow subclause 4.3.4.3.

If the AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received in any other state the
mobile station shall abort any MM specific, MM connection establishment
or call re-establishment procedure, stop any of the timers T3210, T3230,
T3214 or T3216 (if they were running), release all MM connections (if
any), start timer T3240 and enter the state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND,
expecting the release of the RR connection. If the RR connection is not
released within a given time controlled by the timer T3240, the mobile
station shall abort the RR connection. In both cases, either after a RR
connection release triggered from the network side or after a RR
connection abort requested by the MS-side, the MS enters state MM IDLE,
substate NO IMSI.

##### 4.3.2.5.1 Authentication not accepted by the MS

In a UMTS authentication challenge, the authentication procedure is
extended to allow the MS to check the authenticity of the core network.
Thus allowing, for instance, detection of false base station.

Following a UMTS authentication challenge, the MS may reject the core
network, on the grounds of an incorrect AUTN parameter (see
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). This parameter contains two possible causes for
authentication failure:

a\) MAC code failure:

If the MS considers the MAC code (supplied by the core network in the
AUTN parameter) to be invalid, it shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE
message to the network, with the reject cause \'MAC failure\'. The MS
shall then follow the procedure described in subclause 4.3.2.6 (c).

b\) SQN failure:

If the MS considers the SQN (supplied by the core network in the AUTN
parameter) to be out of range, it shall send a AUTHENTICATION FAILURE
message to the network, with the reject cause \'Synch failure\' and a
re-synchronization token AUTS provided by the USIM (see
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). The MS shall then follow the procedure described
in subclause 4.3.2.6 (d).

In UMTS, an MS with a USIM inserted shall reject the authentication
challenge if no Authentication Parameter AUTN IE was present in the
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message (i.e. a GSM authentication challenge has
been received when the MS expects a UMTS authentication challenge). In
such a case, the MS shall send the AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message to the
network, with the reject cause \"GSM authentication unacceptable\". The
MS shall then follow the procedure described in subclause 4.3.2.6 (c).

If the MS returns an AUTHENTICATION\_FAILURE message to the network, the
MS shall delete any previously stored RAND and RES and shall stop timer
T3218, if running.

#### 4.3.2.6 Abnormal cases

\(a) RR connection failure:

Upon detection of a RR connection failure before the AUTHENTICATION
RESPONSE message is received, the network shall release all MM
connections (if any) and abort any ongoing MM specific procedure.

\(b) Expiry of timer T3260:

The authentication procedure is supervised on the network side by the
timer T3260. At expiry of this timer the network may release the RR
connection. In this case the network shall abort the authentication
procedure and any ongoing MM specific procedure, release all MM
connections if any, and initiate the RR connection release procedure
described in subclause 3.5 of 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] (A/Gb mode only),
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] (UTRAN Iu mode only), or in
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\] (GERAN Iu mode only).

\(c) Authentication failure (reject cause \"MAC failure\" or \"GSM
authentication unacceptable\"):

The MS shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with reject cause
\"MAC failure\" or \"GSM authentication unacceptable\" according to
subclause 4.3.2.5.1, to the network and start timer T3214. Furthermore,
the MS shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are running
(e.g. T3210, T3220 or T3230). Upon the first receipt of an
AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the MS with reject cause \"MAC
failure\" or \"GSM authentication unacceptable\", the network may
initiate the identification procedure described in subclause 4.3.3. This
is to allow the network to obtain the IMSI from the MS. The network may
then check that the TMSI originally used in the authentication challenge
corresponded to the correct IMSI. Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST
message from the network, the MS shall send the IDENTITY RESPONSE
message.

NOTE: Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the MS with
reject cause \"MAC failure\" or \"GSM authentication unacceptable\", the
network may also terminate the authentication procedure (see
subclause 4.3.2.5).

If the TMSI/IMSI mapping in the network was incorrect, the network
should respond by sending a new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message to the
MS. Upon receiving the new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message from the
network, the MS shall stop the timer T3214, if running, and then process
the challenge information as normal. If theTMSI/IMSI mapping in the
network was correct, the network should terminate the authentication
procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message.

If the network is validated successfully (an AUTHENTICATION REQUEST
message that contains a valid SQN and MAC is received), the MS shall
send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the network and shall start
any retransmission timers (e.g. T3210, T3220 or T3230), if they were
running and stopped when the MS received the first failed AUTHENTICATION
REQUEST message.

If the MS receives the second AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message while T3214
is running, and the MAC value cannot be resolved or the message contains
a GSM authentication challenge, the MS shall follow the procedure
specified in this subclause (c), starting again from the beginning. If
the SQN is invalid, the MS shall proceed as specified in (d).

It can be assumed that the source of the authentication challenge is not
genuine (authentication not accepted by the MS) if any of the following
occur:

\- the timer T3214 expires;

\- the MS detects any combination of the authentication failures: \"MAC
failure\", \"invalid SQN\", and \"GSM authentication unacceptable\",
during three consecutive authentication challenges. The authentication
challenges shall be considered as consecutive only, if the
authentication challenges causing the second and third authentication
failure are received by the MS, while the timer T3214 or T3216 started
after the previous authentication failure is running.

The MS shall stop timer T3214, if the timer is running and the MS
detects an RR connection failure or the network releases the RR
connection.

When it has been deemed by the MS that the source of the authentication
challenge is not genuine (i.e. authentication not accepted by the MS),
the MS shall behave as described in subclause 4.3.2.6.1.

Figure 4.2/3GPP TS 24.008: Authentication Failure Procedure\
(reject cause \"MAC failure\" or \"GSM authentication unacceptable\")

\(d) Authentication failure (reject cause \"synch failure\"):

The MS shall send an AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message, with reject cause
\"synch failure\", to the network and start the timer T3216.
Furthermore, the MS shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are
running (e.g. T3210, T3220 or T3230). Upon the first receipt of an
AUTHENTICATION FAILURE message from the MS with the reject cause \"synch
failure\", the network shall use the returned AUTS parameter from the
authentication failure parameter IE in the AUTHENTICATION FAILURE
message, to re-synchronise. The re-synchronisation procedure requires
the VLR/MSC to delete all unused authentication vectors for that IMSI
and obtain new vectors from the HLR. When re-synchronisation is
complete, the network shall initiate the authentication procedure. Upon
receipt of the AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message, the MS shall stop the
timer T3216, if running.

NOTE: Upon receipt of two consecutive AUTHENTICATION FAILURE messages
from the MS with reject cause \"synch failure\", the network may
terminate the authentication procedure by sending an AUTHENTICATION
REJECT message.

If the network is validated successfully (a new AUTHENTICATION REQUEST
message is received which contains a valid SQN and MAC) while T3216 is
running, the MS shall send the AUTHENTICATION RESPONSE message to the
network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3210, T3220 or
T3230), if they were running and stopped when the MS received the first
failed AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

If the MS receives the second AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message while T3216
is running, and the MAC value cannot be resolved or the message contains
a GSM authentication challenge, the MS shall proceed as specified in
(c); if the SQN is invalid, the MS shall follow the procedure specified
in this subclause (d), starting again fom the beginning.

The MS shall deem that the network has failed the authentication check
and behave as described in subclause 4.3.2.6.1, if any of the following
occurs:

\- the timer T3216 expires;

\- the MS detects any combination of the authentication failures: \"MAC
failure\", \"invalid SQN\", and \"GSM authentication unacceptable\",
during three consecutive authentication challenges. The authentication
challenges shall be considered as consecutive only, if the
authentication challenges causing the second and third authentication
failure are received by the MS, while the timer T3214 or T3216 started
after the previous authentication failure is running.

The MS shall stop timer T3216, if the timer is running and the MS
detects an RR connection failure or the network releases the RR
connection.

When it has been deemed by the MS that the source of the authentication
challenge is not genuine (i.e. authentication not accepted by the MS),
the MS shall behave as described in subclause 4.3.2.6.1.

Figure 4.2a/3GPP TS 24.008: Authentication Failure Procedure (reject
cause \"Synch failure\")

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message, the mobile station
shall perform the actions as specified in subclause 4.3.2.5. If an MS
has an MM connection for an emergency call established or is
establishing an MM connection for an emergency call when timer T3214 or
T3216 expires, the MS shall not deem that the network has failed the
authentication check and not behave as described in subclause 4.3.2.6.1.

##### 4.3.2.6.1 MS behaviour towards a network that has failed the authentication procedure

If the MS deems that the network has failed the authentication check,
then it shall request RR or RRC to release the RR connection and the PS
signalling connection, if any, and bar the active cell or cells (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\], 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] and
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]). The MS shall start any retransmission timers
(e.g. T3210, T3220 or T3230), if they were running and stopped when the
MS received the first AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message containing an
invalid MAC or invalid SQN, or no AUTN when a UMTS authentication
challenge was expected.

#### 4.3.2.7 Handling of keys at intersystem change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode

At inter-system change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode, ciphering may be
started (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]) without any new authentication
procedure. Deduction of the appropriate security key for ciphering in
A/Gb mode, depends on the current GSM/UMTS security context stored in
the MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the GSM ciphering key and a potential GSM Kc~128~
according to table 4.3.2.7.1.

Table 4.3.2.7.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from Iu mode to A/Gb
mode

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Security context established in   | At inter-system change to A/Gb    |
| MS and network in Iu mode         | mode:                             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| GSM security context              | An ME shall apply the stored GSM  |
|                                   | ciphering key that was received   |
|                                   | from the GSM security context     |
|                                   | residing in the SIM/USIM during   |
|                                   | the latest successful ciphering   |
|                                   | mode setting or security mode     |
|                                   | control procedure before the      |
|                                   | inter-system change.              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| UMTS security context             | If an A5 algorithm is taken into  |
|                                   | use that requires a 64-bit        |
|                                   | ciphering key, then an ME shall   |
|                                   | apply the stored GSM ciphering    |
|                                   | key that was derived by the USIM  |
|                                   | from the UMTS ciphering key and   |
|                                   | the UMTS integrity key and        |
|                                   | provided by the USIM during the   |
|                                   | latest successful ciphering mode  |
|                                   | setting or security mode control  |
|                                   | procedure before the inter-sytem  |
|                                   | change.                           |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | If an A5 algorithm is taken into  |
|                                   | use that requires a 128-bit       |
|                                   | ciphering key, then an ME shall   |
|                                   | apply the GSM Kc~128~ derived by  |
|                                   | the ME from the UMTS ciphering    |
|                                   | key and the UMTS integrity key    |
|                                   | (see 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\])       |
|                                   | provided by USIM during the       |
|                                   | lastest successful ciphering mode |
|                                   | setting or security mode control  |
|                                   | procedure before the inter-system |
|                                   | change (see subclause 4.3.2.3a).  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

NOTE: A USIM with UMTS security context, passes the UMTS ciphering key,
the UMTS integrity key and the derived GSM ciphering key to the ME
independent on the current radio access being UTRAN or GERAN.

#### 4.3.2.7a Use of established security contexts

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established GSM security context, the
GSM ciphering key shall be loaded from the SIM/USIM and taken into use
by the ME when any valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND is received during an RR
connection (the definition of a valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND message is
given in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.4.7.2).

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, the
GSM ciphering key shall be loaded from the USIM and taken into use by
the MS when a valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND is received during an RR
connection (the definition of a valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND message is
given in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.4.7.2) which indicates an A5
ciphering algorithm that requires a 64-bit ciphering key. The network
shall derive a GSM ciphering key from the UMTS ciphering key and the
UMTS integrity key by using the conversion function named \"c3\" defined
in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, the
UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key shall be loaded from the
USIM in order for the ME to derive the GSM Kc~128~ (see
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]) and shall be taken into use by the ME when a
valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND is received during an RR connection (the
definition of a valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND message is given in
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.4.7.2) which indicates an A5 ciphering
algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key. The network shall
derive a GSM Kc~128~ from the UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS integrity
as defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In Iu mode, in the case of an established GSM security context, the ME
shall derive a UMTS ciphering key and a UMTS integrity key from the GSM
ciphering key by using the conversion functions named \"c4\" and \"c5\"
defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The GSM ciphering key shall be loaded
from the SIM/USIM and the derived UMTS ciphering key and UMTS integrity
key shall be taken into use by the MS when a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND
indicating CS domain is received during an RR connection (the definition
of a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is given in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]). The network shall
derive a UMTS ciphering key and a UMTS integrity key from the GSM
ciphering key by using the conversion functions named \"c4\" and \"c5\"
defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In Iu mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, the
UMTS ciphering key and UMTS integrity key shall be loaded from the USIM
and taken into use by the MS when a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND
indicating CS domain is received during a RR connection (the definition
of a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is given in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

In Iu mode and A/Gb mode, if the MS received a valid SECURITY MODE
COMMAND indicating CS domain in Iu mode or a valid CIPHERING MODE
COMMAND in A/Gb mode before the network initiates a new Authentication
procedure and establishes a new GSM/UMTS security context, the new keys
are taken into use in the MS when a new valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND
indicating CS domain in Iu mode, or a new valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND
in A/Gb mode, is received during the RR connection. In case of Iu mode
to Iu mode handover, A/Gb mode to A/Gb mode handover, or inter-system
change to A/Gb mode, the MS and the network shall continue to use the
key from the old key set until a new valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND
indicating CS domain in Iu mode, or a new valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND
in A/Gb mode, is received during the RR connection. In case of
inter-system change to Iu mode, the MS and the network shall continue to
use the keys from the old key set until the second valid SECURITY MODE
COMMAND indicating CS domain is received during the RR connection.

NOTE 1: If the MS received a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND indicating CS
domain in Iu mode or a valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND in A/Gb mode before
the inter-system change to Iu mode occurs, the first SECURITY MODE
COMMAND message after the inter-system change, which indicates CS domain
and includes only an Integrity protection mode IE, is initiated by the
UTRAN without receipt of a corresponding RANAP security mode control
procedure from the MSC/VLR. The only purpose of this SECURITY MODE
COMMAND message is to activate the integrity protection, but not to load
a new key set from the SIM/USIM (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

NOTE 2: If the MS did not receive any valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND
indicating CS domain in Iu mode or any valid CIPHERING MODE COMMAND in
A/Gb mode before the inter-system change to Iu mode occurs, the first
SECURITY MODE COMMAND message after the inter-system change, which
indicates CS domain, is initiated by the UTRAN on receipt of a RANAP
security mode control procedure from the MSC/VLR. The purpose of this
SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is to load a key set from the SIM/USIM and
to activate either integrity protection or ciphering and integrity
protection (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

#### 4.3.2.8 Handling of keys at intersystem change from A/Gb mode to Iu mode

At inter-system change from A/Gb mode to Iu mode, ciphering and
integrity may be started (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) without any new
authentication procedure. Deduction of the appropriate security keys for
ciphering and integrity check in Iu mode, depends on the current
GSM/UMTS security context stored in the MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key
according to table 4.3.2.8.1.

Table 4.3.2.8.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from A/Gb mode to Iu
mode

  ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Security context established in MS and network in A/Gb mode   At inter-system change to Iu mode:
  GSM security context                                          An ME shall derive the UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key from the stored GSM ciphering key that was provided by the SIM/USIM during the latest successful ciphering mode setting or security mode control procedure before the inter-system change. The conversion functions named \"c4\" and \"c5\" in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] are used for this purpose.
  UMTS security context                                         An ME shall apply the stored UMTS ciphering key and the stored UMTS integrity key that were received from the UMTS security context residing in the USIM during the latest successful ciphering mode setting or security mode control procedure before the inter-system change.
  ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE: A USIM with UMTS security context, passes the UMTS ciphering key,
the UMTS integrity key and the derived GSM ciphering key to the ME
independent on the current radio access being UTRAN or GERAN.

#### 4.3.2.9 Void

#### 4.3.2.10 Derivation of keys at SRVCC or vSRVCC handover from S1 mode

##### 4.3.2.10.0 General

NOTE: The keys CK~SRVCC~ and IK~SRVCC~ apply for both SRVCC and vSRVCC.

##### 4.3.2.10.1 PDN connection with integrity protection

At PS to CS domain change from S1 mode due to SRVCC or vSRVCC handover
of a PDN connection for which the \"null integrity protection
algorithm\" EIA0 has not been used (see 3GPP TS 23.216 \[126\]), when
the MS receives the command to perform handover, the MS shall derive a
UMTS security context for the CS domain from the current EPS security
context.

The MS shall set the CKSN of the derived UMTS security context to the
value of the eKSI of the EPS security context and derive security keys
CK~SRVCC~ and IK~SRVCC~ as specified in 3GPP TS 33.401 \[123\]. The ME
shall also derive the security key GSM ciphering key Kc from CK~SRVCC~
and IK~SRVCC~ using the conversion function c3 as specified in
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The MS shall apply these derived security keys,
handle the START~CS~ value as specified in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
replace an already established UMTS security context for the CS domain,
if any, in the USIM, when the SRVCC or vSRVCC handover from S1 mode has
been completed successfully.

NOTE: Because of deriving a new UMTS security context for the CS domain,
a new GSM ciphering key needs also to be derived from the new derived
UMTS security keys for the CS domain (i.e. CK~SRVCC~ and IK~SRVCC~).
Note that the new GSM ciphering key is also part of the new UMTS
security context for the CS domain as well, as any old GSM ciphering key
stored in the USIM and in the ME, belongs to an old UMTS security
context for the CS domain and can no longer be used.

The network shall replace an already established UMTS security context
for the CS domain, if any, when the SRVCC or vSRVCC handover from S1
mode has been completed successfully.

If the SRVCC or vSRVCC handover from S1mode has not been completed
successfully, the MS and the network shall delete the new derived GSM or
UMTS security context for the CS domain. Additionally, the network shall
delete the already established GSM or UMTS security context for the CS
domain, if the CKSN of the already established GSM or UMTS security
context is equal to the CKSN of the new derived GSM or UMTS security
context for the CS domain.

##### 4.3.2.10.2 PDN connection without integrity protection

At PS to CS domain change from S1 mode due to SRVCC handover of a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services for which the \"null integrity
protection algorithm\" EIA0 has been used while in S1 mode, the MS and
the network shall not perform key derivation.

#### 4.3.2.11 Derivation of keys at SRVCC handover from Iu mode to Iu mode

##### 4.3.2.11.1 PDN connection with integrity protection

At PS to CS domain change from Iu mode to Iu mode due to SRVCC handover
of a PDN connection for which integrity protection has been activated,
ciphering and integrity may be started (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\])
without any new authentication procedure. Deduction of the appropriate
security keys for ciphering and integrity check in Iu mode, depends on
the current GSM or UMTS security context for the PS domain stored in the
MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the UMTS ciphering key and the UMTS integrity key
according to table 4.3.2.11.1.

Table 4.3.2.11.1/3GPP TS 24.008: SRVCC handover from Iu mode to Iu mode

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Security context for the PS domain established in MS and network in Iu mode   At inter-system change to Iu mode:
  GSM security context                                                          An ME shall derive the GSM ciphering key (Kc') from the stored GPRS GSM ciphering key, which was provided by the SIM/USIM during the latest successful authentication, and the NONCE received in the command to perform handover (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) using the key derivation function specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The ME shall use the derived GSM ciphering key (Kc') to derive the UMTS security keys UMTS ciphering key (CK') and UMTS integrity key (IK'). The conversion functions named \"c4\" and \"c5\" in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] are used for this purpose. The MS shall set the CKSN of the derived GSM security context for the CS domain to the value of the GPRS CKSN of the GSM security context for PS domain. Furthermore, the ME shall apply the new derived UMTS security keys and replace an already established GSM security context for the CS domain, if any, in the SIM/USIM, when the SRVCC handover from Iu mode has been completed successfully. Furthermore, the MS shall handle the START~CS~ value as specified in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).
  UMTS security context                                                         An ME shall derive the UMTS security keys UMTS ciphering key (CK') and UMTS integrity key (IK') from the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key, which were received from the UMTS security context for the PS domain residing in the USIM, and the NONCE received in the command to perform handover (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The ME shall use the derived UMTS security keys to derive the GSM ciphering key (Kc') using the \"c3\" conversion function as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The MS shall set the CKSN of the derived UMTS security context for the CS domain to the value of the KSI of the UMTS security context for PS domain. Furthermore, the ME shall apply the derived UMTS security keys and replace an already established UMTS security context for the CS domain, if any, in the USIM, when the SRVCC handover from Iu mode has been completed successfully. Furthermore, the MS shall handle the START~CS~ value as specified in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE 1: For the case of an established UMTS security context for the PS
domain, because of deriving a new UMTS security context for the CS
domain, a new GSM ciphering key needs to be derived from the new derived
UMTS security keys (i.e. CK\' and IK\'). Note that the new GSM ciphering
key is also part of the new UMTS security context for the CS domain, and
therefore any old GSM ciphering key stored in the USIM and in the ME
belongs to an old UMTS security context for the CS domain and can no
longer be taken into use.

The network shall replace an already established GSM or UMTS security
context for the CS domain, if any, when the SRVCC handover from Iu mode
to Iu mode has been completed successfully.

If the SRVCC handover from Iu mode to Iu mode has not been completed
successfully, the MS and the network shall delete the new derived GSM or
UMTS security context for the CS domain. Additionally, the network shall
delete the already established GSM or UMTS security context for the CS
domain, if the CKSN of the already established GSM or UMTS security
context is equal to the CKSN of the new derived GSM or UMTS security
context for the CS domain.

##### 4.3.2.11.2 PDN connection without integrity protection

At PS to CS domain change from Iu mode to Iu mode due to SRVCC handover
of a PDN connection for emergency bearer services for which integrity
protection has not been activated before the SRVCC handover, the MS and
the network shall not perform key derivation.

#### 4.3.2.12 Derivation of keys at SRVCC handover from Iu mode to A/Gb mode

##### 4.3.2.12.1 PDN connection with integrity protection

At PS to CS domain change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode due to SRVCC
handover of a PDN connection for which integrity protection has been
activated, ciphering may be started (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]) without
any new authentication procedure. Deduction of the appropriate security
key for ciphering in A/Gb mode, depends on the current GSM or UMTS
security context for the PS domain stored in the MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the GSM ciphering key according to table 4.3.2.12.1.

Table 4.3.2.12.1/3GPP TS 24.008: SRVCC handover from Iu mode to A/Gb
mode

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Security context for the PS       | At inter-system change to A/Gb    |
| domain established in MS and      | mode:                             |
| network in Iu mode                |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| GSM security context              | An ME shall derive the GSM        |
|                                   | ciphering key (Kc') from the      |
|                                   | stored GPRS GSM ciphering key,    |
|                                   | which was provided by the         |
|                                   | SIM/USIM during the latest        |
|                                   | successful authentication, and    |
|                                   | the NONCE received in the command |
|                                   | to perform handover (see          |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) using the |
|                                   | key derivation function specified |
|                                   | in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The MS  |
|                                   | shall set the CKSN of the derived |
|                                   | GSM security context for the CS   |
|                                   | domain to the value of the GPRS   |
|                                   | CKSN of the GSM security context  |
|                                   | for PS domain. Furthermore, the   |
|                                   | ME shall apply the new derived    |
|                                   | GSM ciphering key and replace an  |
|                                   | already established GSM security  |
|                                   | context for the CS domain, if     |
|                                   | any, in the SIM/USIM when the     |
|                                   | SRVCC handover from Iu mode has   |
|                                   | been completed successfully.      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| UMTS security context             | An ME shall derive the UMTS       |
|                                   | security keys UMTS ciphering key  |
|                                   | (CK') and UMTS integrity key      |
|                                   | (IK') from the GPRS UMTS          |
|                                   | ciphering key and GPRS UMTS       |
|                                   | integrity key, which were         |
|                                   | received from the UMTS security   |
|                                   | context for the PS domain         |
|                                   | residing in the USIM, and the     |
|                                   | NONCE received in the command to  |
|                                   | perform handover (see             |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) as        |
|                                   | specified in                      |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The ME     |
|                                   | shall use the derived UMTS        |
|                                   | security keys to derive the GSM   |
|                                   | ciphering key (Kc') using the     |
|                                   | \"c3\" conversion function as     |
|                                   | specified in                      |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].            |
|                                   | Furthermore, the MS shall set the |
|                                   | CKSN of the derived UMTS security |
|                                   | context for the CS domain to the  |
|                                   | value of the KSI of the UMTS      |
|                                   | security context for PS domain.   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | If an A5 algorithm is taken into  |
|                                   | use that requires a 64-bit long   |
|                                   | ciphering key, then the ME shall  |
|                                   | apply the new derived GSM         |
|                                   | ciphering key.                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | If an A5 algorithm is taken into  |
|                                   | use that requires a 128-bit long  |
|                                   | ciphering key, then the ME shall  |
|                                   | use the derived UMTS security     |
|                                   | keys CK\' and IK\' to derive a    |
|                                   | GSM Kc~128~ (see                  |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). After     |
|                                   | that, the ME shall apply the new  |
|                                   | derived GSM Kc~128.~              |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Furthermore, the ME shall replace |
|                                   | an already established UMTS       |
|                                   | security context for the CS       |
|                                   | domain, if any, in the USIM, when |
|                                   | the SRVCC handover from Iu mode   |
|                                   | has been completed successfully.  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The network shall replace an already established GSM or UMTS security
context for the CS domain, if any, when the SRVCC handover from Iu mode
to A/Gb mode has been completed successfully.

If the SRVCC handover from Iu mode to A/Gb mode has not been completed
successfully, the MS and the network shall delete the new derived GSM or
UMTS security context for the CS domain. Additionally, the network shall
delete the already established GSM or UMTS security context for the CS
domain, if the CKSN of the already established GSM or UMTS security
context is equal to the CKSN of the new derived GSM or UMTS security
context for the CS domain.

##### 4.3.2.12.2 PDN connection without integrity protection

At PS to CS domain change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode due to SRVCC
handover of a PDN connection for emergency bearer services for which
integrity protection has not been activated while in Iu mode, the MS and
the network shall not perform key derivation.

#### 4.3.2.13 Derivation of keys at CS to PS SRVCC handover from A/Gb mode to Iu mode

At change from A/Gb mode to Iu mode due to CS to PS SRVCC handover (see
3GPP TS 23.216 \[126\]), the MS shall derive a UMTS security context for
the PS domain from the current GSM or UMTS security context for the CS
domain.

At change from A/Gb mode to Iu mode due to CS to PS SRVCC handover,
ciphering may be started and integrity protection shall be started (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) without any new authentication procedure.
Derivation of the appropriate security keys for ciphering and integrity
protection for the PS domain in Iu mode depends on the current GSM or
UMTS security context for the CS domain stored in the MS and the
network.

The ME shall handle the PS UMTS ciphering key and the PS UMTS integrity
key according to table 4.3.2.13.1.

Table 4.3.2.13.1/3GPP TS 24.008: CS to PS SRVCC handover from A/Gb mode
to Iu mode

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Security context for the CS domain established in MS and network in A/Gb mode   At inter-system change to Iu mode:
  GSM security context                                                            An ME shall derive the GPRS ciphering key (Kc\') from the stored GSM ciphering key, which was provided by the SIM/USIM during the latest successful authentication, and the NONCE~MSC~ received in the command to perform handover (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) using the key derivation function specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The ME shall set the GPRS CKSN\' of the derived GPRS security context (Kc\') for the PS domain to the value of the GSM CKSN of the GSM security context for CS domain. The ME shall use the derived GPRS ciphering key (Kc\') to derive the PS UMTS security keys PS UMTS ciphering key (CK\') and PS UMTS integrity key (IK\') for the PS domain. The conversion functions named \"c4\" and \"c5\" in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] are used for this purpose. The ME shall associate the derived keys PS UMTS ciphering key (CK\') and PS UMTS integrity key (IK\') for the PS domain with a KSI\' which shall be set to the value of the GPRS CKSN of the derived GPRS security context (Kc\') for the PS domain. Furthermore, the ME shall apply the new derived PS UMTS security keys (CK\', IK\') and replace an already established GPRS security context for the PS domain, if any, by overwriting the stored GPRS Kc and GPRS CKSN with the derived GPRS Kc\' and GPRS CKSN\' in both the ME and the SIM/USIM, when the CS to PS SRVCC handover has been completed successfully. Furthermore, the MS shall handle the START~PS~ value as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].
  UMTS security context                                                           An ME shall derive the PS UMTS security keys PS UMTS ciphering key (CK\') and PS UMTS integrity key (IK\') from the CS UMTS ciphering key and the CS UMTS integrity key, which were received from the UMTS security context for the CS domain residing in the USIM, and the NONCE~MSC~ received in the command to perform handover (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The ME shall set the KSI\' of the derived PS UMTS security context (CK\' and IK\') for the PS domain to the value of the KSI of the CS UMTS security context for the CS domain. The ME shall use the derived PS UMTS security keys (CK\' and IK\') to derive the GPRS ciphering key (Kc\') using the \"c3\" conversion function as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The ME shall set the CKSN\' associated with the derived GPRS ciphering key (Kc\') to the value of the KSI of the derived PS UMTS security context (CK\' and IK\') for the PS domain. Furthermore, the ME shall apply the derived PS UMTS security keys (CK\' and IK\') and replace an already established UMTS security context for the PS domain, if any, by overwriting the stored UMTS PS CK, UMTS PS IK, UMTS PS KSI, GPRS Kc,and GPRS CKSN with the derived UMTS PS CK\', UMTS PS IK\', UMTS PS KSI\', GPRS Kc\' and GPRS CKSN\', in both the ME and the USIM, when the CS to PS SRVCC handover has been completed successfully. Furthermore, the MS shall handle the START~PS~ value as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The network shall replace an already established GSM or UMTS security
context for the PS domain, if any, when the CS to PS SRVCC handover from
A/Gb mode to Iu mode has been completed successfully.

If the CS to PS SRVCC handover from A/Gb mode to Iu mode has not been
completed successfully, the MS and the network shall delete the new
derived GSM or UMTS security context for the PS domain. Additionally,
the network shall delete the already established GSM or UMTS security
context for the PS domain, if the GPRS CKSN of the already established
GSM or UMTS security context is equal to the GPRS CKSN of the new
derived GSM or UMTS security context for the PS domain.

#### 4.3.2.14 Derivation of keys at 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN

##### 4.3.2.14.1 PDU session with integrity protection

At 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN handover of a PDU session for which the
\"null integrity protection algorithm\" 5G-IA0 has not been used (see
3GPP TS 23.216 \[126\]), when the MS receives the command to perform
handover, the MS shall derive a new K~ASME\_SRVCC~ from K~AMF~ as
specified in 3GPP TS 33.501 \[170\].

The MS shall set the CKSN of the derived UMTS security context to the
value of the eKSI associated with the new K~ASME\_SRVCC~ and derive
security keys CK~SRVCC~ and IK~SRVCC~ from the new K~ASME\_SRVCC~ as
specified in 3GPP TS 33.401 \[123\]. The MS shall apply these derived
security keys, handle the START~CS~ value as specified in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and replace an already established UMTS security
context for the CS domain, if any, in the USIM, when the 5G-SRVCC
handover from NG-RAN to UTRAN has been completed successfully.

The network shall replace an already established UMTS security context
for the CS domain, if any, when the 5G-SRVCC handover from NG-RAN to
UTRAN has been completed successfully.

If the 5G-SRVCC handover from NG-RAN to UTRAN has not been completed
successfully, the MS and the network shall delete the new derived UMTS
security context for the CS domain. Additionally, the network shall
delete the already established UMTS security context for the CS domain,
if the CKSN of the already established UMTS security context is equal to
the CKSN of the new derived UMTS security context for the CS domain.

##### 4.3.2.14.2 PDU session without integrity protection

At the 5G-SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN handover of an emergency PDU
connection for which the \"null integrity protection algorithm\" 5G-IA0
has been used while in N1 mode, the MS and the network shall not perform
key derivation.

### 4.3.3 Identification procedure

#### 4.3.3.0 General

The identification procedure is used by the network to request a mobile
station to provide specific identification parameters to the network
e.g. International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI), International
Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI). IMEI and IMSI definition and structure
are specified in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\].

#### 4.3.3.1 Identity request by the network

The network initiates the identification procedure by sending an
IDENTITY REQUEST message to the mobile station and starting the timer
T3270 (see figure 4.3). The IDENTITY REQUEST message specifies the
requested identification parameters in the Identity type information
element.

#### 4.3.3.2 Identification response by the mobile station

The mobile station shall be ready to respond to an IDENTITY REQUEST
message at any time whilst a RR connection exists.

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST message the mobile station shall
send an IDENTITY RESPONSE message. The IDENTITY RESPONSE message shall
contain the identification parameters as requested by the network.

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST message with the Identity type IE
indicating that P-TMSI, RAI and P-TMSI signature are being requested, an
MS that supports S1 mode shall handle the IDENTITY RESPONSE message as
follows:

\- If the TIN indicates \"GUTI\" and the MS holds a valid GUTI, the MS
shall map the GUTI into a P-TMSI, P‑TMSI signature and RAI as specified
in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]. The MS shall indicate the P-TMSI in the Mobile
identity IE. In addition, the MS shall include the mapped RAI in the
Routing area identification IE and the mapped P-TMSI signature in the
P-TMSI signature IE. In addition, the MS shall include the P-TMSI type
IE with P-TMSI type set to \"mapped P-TMSI\".

\- If the TIN indicates \"P-TMSI\" or \"RAT‑related TMSI\" and the MS
holds a valid P-TMSI and RAI, the MS shall indicate the P-TMSI in the
Mobile identity IE and shall indicate the RAI in the Routing area
identification IE. In addition, the MS shall include the P-TMSI type IE
with P-TMSI type set to \"native P-TMSI\". If the MS holds a valid
P-TMSI signature, it shall include it in the P-TMSI signature IE.

If the MS does not support S1 mode, it shall handle the IDENTITY
RESPONSE message as follows:

\- If the MS holds a valid P-TMSI and RAI, the MS shall indicate the
P-TMSI in the Mobile identity IE and shall indicate the RAI in the
Routing area identification IE. In addition, the MS shall include the
P-TMSI type IE with P-TMSI type set to \"native P-TMSI\". If the MS
holds a valid P-TMSI signature, it shall include it in the P-TMSI
signature IE.

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY RESPONSE message, the network shall stop
timer T3270.

#### 4.3.3.3 Abnormal cases in the mobile station

The following abnormal case can be identified:

a\) Requested identity is not available

If the MS cannot encode the requested identity in the IDENTITY RESPONSE
message, e.g. because no valid SIM is available, then it shall encode
the identity type as \"no identity\".

#### 4.3.3.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) RR connection failure:

Upon detection of a RR connection failure before the IDENTITY RESPONSE
message is received, the network shall release all MM connections (if
any) and abort any ongoing MM specific procedure.

b\) Expiry of timer T3270:

The identification procedure is supervised by the network by the timer
T3270. At expiry of the timer T3270 the network may release the RR
connection. In this case, the network shall abort the identification
procedure and any ongoing MM specific procedure, release all MM
connections if any, and initiate the RR connection release procedure as
described in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.5, 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]
(UTRAN Iu mode only), or in 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\] (GERAN Iu mode only).

![](media/image10.emf){width="3.7777777777777777in"
height="0.8472222222222222in"}

Figure 4.3/3GPP TS 24.008: Identification sequence

### 4.3.4 IMSI detach procedure

#### 4.3.4.0 General

The IMSI detach procedure may be invoked by a mobile station if the
mobile station is deactivated or if the Subscriber Identity Module (see
3GPP TS 42.017 \[7\] and 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) is detached from the
mobile station or as part of the eCall inactivity procedure defined in
subclause 4.4.7.

In A/Gb mode and GERAN Iu mode, the network indicates whether the IMSI
detach/attach procedures are required by using the ATT flag which is
broadcast in the L3-RR SYSTEM INFORMATION TYPE 3 message on the BCCH
(see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 10.5.2.11). The mobile station
shall use the value of the ATT flag that was broadcast when the mobile
station was in the MM IDLE state.

In UTRAN Iu mode, the network indicates whether the IMSI detach/attach
procedures are required by using the ATT flag which is included in the
CS domain specific system information element (see
subclause 10.5.1.12.2). The mobile station shall use the latest received
value of the ATT flag.

If a RR connection exists and the ATT flag indicates that the IMSI
detach/attach procedures are not required, the MM sublayer will release
locally any ongoing MM connections before releasing the RR connection.
If an MM specific procedure is active, the release of the RR connection
may be delayed until the MM specific procedure is complete.

The IMSI detach procedure causes the mobile station to be indicated as
inactive in the network.

The mobile station is allowed to initiate the IMSI detach procedure even
if the timer T3246 is running.

The network proceeds with the IMSI detach procedure even if NAS level
mobility management congestion control is active.

#### 4.3.4.1 IMSI detach initiation by the mobile station

The IMSI detach procedure consists only of the IMSI DETACH INDICATION
message sent from the mobile station to the network. The mobile station
then starts timer T3220 and enters the MM sublayer state IMSI DETACH
INITIATED.

If no RR connection exists, the MM sublayer within the mobile station
will request the RR sublayer to establish a RR connection. If
establishment of the RR connection is not possible because a suitable
cell is not (or not yet) available then, the mobile station shall try
for a period of at least 5 seconds and for not more than a period of 20
seconds to find a suitable cell. If a suitable cell is found during this
time then, the mobile station shall request the RR sublayer to establish
an RR connection, otherwise the IMSI detach is aborted. For:

\- a shared GERAN in A/Gb mode, if the MS is a GERAN network sharing
supporting MS, the chosen PLMN identity shall be indicated to the GERAN
in the IMSI DETACH INDICATION message using the Skip Indicator IE as
specified in subclause 10.3.1 and;

\- a shared UTRAN, the chosen PLMN identity shall be indicated to the
UTRAN in the RRC INITIAL DIRECT TRANSFER message (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

If a RR connection exists, the MM sublayer will release locally any
ongoing MM connections before the IMSI DETACH INDICATION message is
sent.

The IMSI detach procedure may not be started if a MM specific procedure
is active. If possible, the IMSI detach procedure is then delayed until
the MM specific procedure is finished, else the IMSI detach is omitted.

#### 4.3.4.2 IMSI detach procedure in the network

When receiving an IMSI DETACH INDICATION message, the network may set an
inactive indication for the IMSI. No response is returned to the mobile
station. After reception of the IMSI DETACH INDICATION message the
network shall release locally any ongoing MM connections, and start the
normal RR connection release procedure (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]
subclause 3.5 (A/Gb mode only), 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] (UTRAN Iu mode
only), or in 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\] (GERAN Iu mode only)).

Only applicable for a network supporting VGCS: If an IMSI DETACH
INDICATION message is received from the talking mobile station in a
group call while the network is in service state MM CONNECTION ACTIVE
(GROUP TRANSMIT MODE), the network shall release locally the ongoing MM
connection and then go to the service state GROUP CALL ACTIVE.

#### 4.3.4.3 IMSI detach completion by the mobile station

Timer T3220 is stopped when the RR connection is released. The mobile
station should, if possible, delay the local release of the channel to
allow a normal release from the network side until T3220 timeout. If
this is not possible (e.g. detach at power down) the RR sublayer on the
mobile station side should be aborted.

#### 4.3.4.4 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Lower layer failure

If the establishment of an RR connection is unsuccessful, or the RR
connection is lost, the IMSI detach is aborted by the mobile station.

b\) Access barred because of access class control or EAB

The signalling procedure for IMSI detach shall not be started. The MS
starts the signalling procedure as soon as possible and if still
necessary, i.e. when the barred state is removed or because of a cell
change, or performs a local detach immediately or after an
implementation dependent time.

![](media/image11.png){width="3.4027777777777777in"
height="0.4583333333333333in"}

Figure 4.4/3GPP TS 24.008: IMSI detach sequence

### 4.3.5 Abort procedure

The abort procedure may be invoked by the network to abort any on-going
MM connection establishment or already established MM connection. The
mobile station shall treat ABORT message as compatible with current
protocol state only if it is received when at least one MM connection
exists or an MM connection is being established.

#### 4.3.5.1 Abort procedure initiation by the network

The abort procedure consists only of the ABORT message sent from the
network to the mobile station. Before the sending of the ABORT message
the network shall locally release any ongoing MM connection. After the
sending the network may start the normal RR connection release
procedure.

The Cause information element indicates the reason for the abortion. The
following cause values may apply:

\# 6: Illegal ME

\#17: Network failure

#### 4.3.5.2 Abort procedure in the mobile station

At the receipt of the ABORT message the mobile station shall abort any
MM connection establishment or call re-establishment procedure and
release all MM connections (if any). If cause value \#6 is received the
mobile station shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence
number stored in the SIM/USIM, set the update status to ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and store it in the SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2)
and consider the SIM/USIM invalid until switch off or the SIM/USIM is
removed. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the
lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to
MS implementation-specific maximum value. As a consequence the mobile
station enters state MM IDLE, substate NO IMSI after the release of the
RR connection.

The mobile station shall then wait for the network to release the RR
connection - see subclause 4.5.3.1.

### 4.3.6 MM information procedure

The MM information message support is optional in the network.

The MM information procedure may be invoked by the network at any time
during an RR connection.

#### 4.3.6.1 MM information procedure initiation by the network

The MM information procedure consists only of the MM INFORMATION message
sent from the network to the mobile station. During an RR connection,
the network shall send none, one, or more MM INFORMATION messages to the
mobile station. If more than one MM INFORMATION message is sent, the
messages need not have the same content.

NOTE: The network may be able to select particular instants where it can
send the MM INFORMATION message without adding delay to, or
interrupting, any CM layer transaction, e.g. immediately after the
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message.

#### 4.3.6.2 MM information procedure in the mobile station

When the mobile station (supporting the MM information message) receives
an MM INFORMATION message, it shall accept the message and optionally
use the contents to update appropriate information stored within the
mobile station.

If the mobile station does not support the MM information message the
mobile station shall ignore the contents of the message and return an MM
STATUS message with cause \#97.

4.4 MM specific procedures
--------------------------

A MM specific procedure can only be started if no other MM specific
procedure is running or no MM connection exists between the network and
the mobile station. The end of the running MM specific procedure or the
release of all MM connections have to be awaited before a new MM
specific procedure can be started.

During the lifetime of a MM specific procedure, if a MM connection
establishment is requested by a CM entity, this request will either be
rejected or be delayed until the running MM specific procedure is
terminated (this depends on the implementation).

Any MM common procedure (except IMSI detach) may be initiated during a
MM specific procedure.

Unless it has specific permission from the network (follow-on proceed)
the mobile station side should await the release of the RR connection
used for a MM specific procedure before a new MM specific procedure or
MM connection establishment is started.

NOTE: The network side may use the same RR connection for MM connection
management.

### 4.4.1 Location updating procedure

The location updating procedure is a general procedure which is used for
the following purposes:

\- normal location updating (described in this subclause);

\- periodic updating (see subclause 4.4.2); or

\- IMSI attach (see subclause 4.4.3).

The normal location updating procedure is used to update the
registration of the actual Location Area of a mobile station in the
network. The location updating type information element in the LOCATION
UPDATING REQUEST message shall indicate normal location updating. The
conditions under which the normal location updating procedure is used by
a mobile station in the MM IDLE state are defined for each service state
in subclause 4.2.2.

Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS listening or VBS
listening: A mobile station in RR group receive mode is in the MM IDLE
state, substate RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE) or RECEIVING GROUP
CALL (LIMITED SERVICE). To perform a location updating, the MS in RR
group receive mode shall leave the group receive mode, establish an
independent dedicated RR connection to perform the location updating as
described above and return to the RR group receive mode afterwards.

The MS shall also start the normal location updating procedure:

a\) if the network indicates that the mobile station is unknown in the
VLR as a response to MM connection establishment request;

b\) void

c\) when the MS, configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, enters a GERAN or UTRAN cell in network operation mode II
and timer T3423 has expired or is in the GERAN or UTRAN cell in network
operation mode II when timer T3423 expires;

NOTE 1: Timer T3423 is specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\].

d\) when the MS, configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, enters a GERAN or UTRAN cell after intersystem change
from S1 mode to Iu or A/Gb mode, if timer T3346 is running, and the
location area of the current cell is the same as the stored location
area;

NOTE 2: If inter-system change is due to a mobile originating CS call,
the location updating procedure can be performed after the RR connection
is released unless the MS moves back to E-UTRAN.

e\) when the MS is both IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services and
enters a new routing area where the network operates in network
operation mode I and timer T3346 is running.

f\) when the network is operating in network operation mode I, timer
T3346 is running, timer T3246 is not running, and due to manual CSG
selection the MS has selected a CSG cell whose CSG identity and
associated PLMN identity are not included in the Allowed CSG list or in
the Operator CSG list of the MS;

g\) when due to a manual CSG selection the MS has selected a CSG cell
whose CSG identity and associated PLMN identity are not included in the
MS\'s Allowed CSG list or in the MS\'s Operator CSG list;

h\) when the network is operating in network operation mode I, T3346 is
running, update status is not U1 UPDATED and the user manually selects
the current PLMN; or

i\) when the MS is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, and the TIN indicates \"GUTI\", enters a GERAN or UTRAN
cell after intersystem change from S1 mode to Iu or A/Gb mode in NMO II
and timer T3412 is not running.

If the MS, configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, enters a
GERAN or UTRAN cell, after intersystem change from S1 mode to Iu or A/Gb
mode due to CS fallback, and the location area of the current cell is
not available, the MS may initiate the location updating procedure.

When the MS supporting N1 mode in MS operation modes A or B moves from
NG-RAN coverage to GERAN coverage, or from NG-RAN coverage to UTRAN
coverage, and the network operates in network operation mode II, the MS
may intiate the normal location updating procedure.

To limit the number of consecutive unsuccessful location updating
attempts made, an attempt counter is used. The detailed handling of the
attempt counter is described in subclauses 4.4.4.5 to 4.4.4.9.

The mobile equipment shall contain a list of \"forbidden location areas
for roaming\", as well as a list of \"forbidden location areas for
regional provision of service\". These lists shall be erased when the MS
is switched off or when the SIM/USIM is removed, and periodically (with
period in the range 12 to 24 hours). When the lists are erased, the MS
performs a cell selection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]. The location area identification received on the
BCCH that triggered the location updating request shall be added to the
suitable list whenever a LOCATION AREA UPDATING REJECT message is
received with the cause \"Roaming not allowed in this location area\",
\"Location Area not allowed\", or \"No suitable cells in Location
Area\". The lists shall accommodate each 10 or more location area
identifications. When the list is full and a new entry has to be
inserted, the oldest entry shall be deleted.

In a shared network, the MS shall choose one of the PLMN identities as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]. The MS shall construct the Location
Area Identification of the cell from this chosen PLMN identity and the
LAC received on the BCCH. If the constructed LAI is different from the
stored LAI, the MS shall initiate the location updating procedure. For:

\- a shared GERAN, in A/Gb mode, the chosen PLMN identity shall be
indicated to the GERAN in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message using
the Skip Indicator IE as specified in subclause 10.3.1.

\- a shared UTRAN, the chosen PLMN identity shall be indicated to the
UTRAN in the RRC INITIAL DIRECT TRANSFER message (see 3GPP TS 25.331
\[23c\]).

For GERAN Iu mode, network sharing is not supported.

Whenever a LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message with the cause \"PLMN not
allowed\" is received by the MS, the PLMN identity used to construct the
LAI which triggered the location updating procedure shall be stored in
the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and if the MS is configured to use timer
T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS
shall start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6.
Whenever a LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message is received by the MS with
the cause \"Roaming not allowed in this location area\", \"Location Area
not allowed\", or \"No suitable cells in Location Area\", the
constructed LAI which triggered the location updating procedure shall be
stored in the suitable list.

The cell selection processes in the different states are described in
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\].

The location updating procedure is always initiated by the mobile
station.

In the case that the mobile station is initiating an emergency call but,
due to cell re-selection or redirection by the network, it moves to a
different LAI then the mobile station may delay the location updating
procedure in the new LA until after the emergency call is completed.

### 4.4.2 Periodic updating

Periodic updating may be used to notify periodically the availability of
the mobile station to the network. Periodic updating is performed by
using the location updating procedure. The location updating type
information element in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message shall
indicate periodic updating.

The procedure is controlled by the timer T3212 in the mobile station.
The MS indicates in the MS network feature support IE whether it
supports the extended value for timer T3212. If the MS receives the *Per
MS T3212* IE in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message, the MS shall use
this IE to determine the value of T3212 instead of the value of T3212
that is broadcast. If the MS does not receive the *Per MS T3212* IE in
the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message, the MS shall use the value of
T3212 that is broadcast . If the timer is not already started, the timer
is started each time the mobile station enters the MM IDLE substate
NORMAL SERVICE or ATTEMPTing TO UPDATE. When the MS leaves the MM Idle
State the timer T3212 shall continue running until explicitly stopped.

The timer is stopped (shall be set to its initial value for the next
start) when:

\- a LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT or LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message is
received;

\- an AUTHENTICATION REJECT message is received;

\- the first MM message is received, or security mode setting is
completed in the case of MM connection establishment, except when the
most recent service state is LIMITED SERVICE;

\- the mobile station has responded to paging and thereafter has
received the first correct layer 3 message except RR message;

\- the mobile station is deactivated (i.e. equipment powered down or
SIM/USIM removed).

When the timer T3212 expires, the location updating procedure is started
and the timer shall be set to its initial value for the next start. If
the mobile station is in other state than MM Idle when the timer expires
the location updating procedure is delayed until the MM Idle State is
entered.

The conditions under which the periodic location updating procedure is
used by a mobile station in the MM IDLE state are defined for each
service state in subclause 4.2.2.

If the mobile station is in service state NO CELL AVAILABLE, LIMITED
SERVICE, PLMN SEARCH or PLMN SEARCH-NORMAL SERVICE when the timer
expires the location updating procedure is delayed until this service
state is left.

In A/Gb mode and GERAN Iu mode, the (periodic) location updating
procedure is not started if the BCCH information at the time the
procedure is triggered indicates that periodic location shall not be
used. The timeout value is broadcasted in the L3-RR SYSTEM INFORMATION
TYPE 3 message on the BCCH, in the Control channel description IE, see
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 10.5.2.11.

In UTRAN Iu mode, the (periodic) location updating procedure is not
started if the information on BCCH or in the last received dedicated
system information at the time the procedure is triggered indicates that
periodic location shall not be used. The timeout value is included in
the CS domain specific system information element.

The T3212 timeout value shall not be changed in the NO CELL AVAILABLE,
LIMITED SERVICE, PLMN SEARCH and PLMN SEARCH-NORMAL SERVICE states.

If the MS, configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS over
SGs only, enters a GERAN or UTRAN cell after intersystem change from S1
mode to Iu or A/Gb mode in NMO II, the TIN indicates \"GUTI\", and the
location area of the current cell is the same as the stored location
area, the MS shall start timer T3212, with a value set to the shorter of
the values of the remaining value of timer T3412, and the broadcast
T3212 timeout value.

When the MS supporting N1 mode in MS operation modes A or B moves from
NG-RAN coverage to GERAN coverage, or from NG-RAN coverage to UTRAN
coverage, the network operates in network operation mode II, the
location area of the current cell is the same as the stored location
area, the broadcast value of T3212 does not indicate \"deactivated\" and
the T3212 has expired, the MS may intiate the periodic location updating
procedure.

When a change of the broadcast T3212 timeout value has to be taken into
account and the timer is running (at change of the serving cell or,
change of the broadcast value of T3212), the MS shall behave as follows:
let t1 be the new T3212 timeout value and let t be the current timer
value at the moment of the change to the new T3212 timeout value; then
the timer shall be restarted with the value t modulo t1.

When the mobile station is activated, or when a change of the broadcast
T3212 timeout value has to be taken into account and the timer is not
running, the mobile station shall behave as follows: let t1 be the new
T3212 timeout value, the new timer shall be started at a value randomly,
uniformly drawn between 0 and t1.

### 4.4.3 IMSI attach procedure

The IMSI attach procedure is the complement of the IMSI detach procedure
(see subclause 4.3.4). It is used to indicate the IMSI as active in the
network.

In A/Gb mode and GERAN Iu mode, the network indicates whether the IMSI
attach/detach procedures are required by using the ATT flag which is
broadcast in the L3-RR SYSTEM INFORMATION TYPE 3 message (see
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 10.5.2.11).

In UTRAN Iu mode, the network indicates whether the IMSI attach/detach
procedures are required by using the ATT flag which is included in the
CS domain specific system information element (see
subclause 10.5.1.12.2).

The IMSI attach procedure is invoked if the ATT flag indicates that the
IMSI detach/attach procedures are required and an IMSI is activated in a
mobile station (i.e. activation of a mobile station with plug-in
SIM/USIM, insertion of a card in a card-operated mobile station etc.)
within coverage area from the network or a mobile station with an IMSI
activated outside the coverage area enters the coverage area. The IMSI
attach procedure is used only if the update status is U1 UPDATED and if
the stored location area identification is the same as the one which is
actually broadcasted on the BCCH of the current serving cell.

In a shared network, the MS shall choose one of the PLMN identities as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]. The MS shall use the IMSI attach
procedure only if the update status is U1 UPDATED and the stored
location area identification is equal to the combination of the chosen
PLMN identity and the LAC received on the BCCH. Otherwise a normal
location updating procedure (see subclause 4.4.1) is invoked
independently of the ATT flag indication.

The IMSI attach procedure is performed by using the location updating
procedure (see subclause 4.4.1). The location updating type information
element in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message shall in this case
indicate IMSI attach.

### 4.4.4 Generic Location Updating procedure

#### 4.4.4.1 Location updating initiation by the mobile station

Any timer used for triggering the location updating procedure (e.g.
T3211, T3212) is stopped if running.

As no RR connection exists at the time when the location updating
procedure has to be started, the MM sublayer within the mobile station
will request the RR sublayer to establish a RR connection and enter
state WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION (LOCATION UPDATE). The procedure for
establishing an RR connection is described in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]
subclause 3.3 and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].

The mobile station initiates the location updating procedure by sending
a LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message to the network, starts the timer
T3210 and enters state LOCATION UPDATING INITIATED. The location
updating type information element shall indicate what kind of updating
is requested.

If the MS is configured for \"AttachWithIMSI\" as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\] and the selected PLMN
is neither the registered PLMN nor in the list of equivalent PLMNs, the
MS shall include the IMSI in the Mobile identity IE in the LOCATION
UPDATING REQUEST message.

If the mobile station is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs,
or SMS over SGs only, and TIN indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\" the mobile
station shall set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\" unless the mobile station had
already received the EMM cause \#18 during a combined attach procedure
(see subclause 5.5.1.3.4.3 of 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]) or a combined
tracking area updating procedure (see subclause 5.5.3.3.4.3 of
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]) on the same PLMN, but not disabled the E-UTRAN
capability.

#### 4.4.4.1a Network Request for Additional mobile station Capability Information

In A/Gb mode, the network may initiate the classmark interrogation
procedure, for example, to obtain further information on the mobile
station\'s encryption capabilities.

#### 4.4.4.2 Identification request from the network

The network may initiate the identification procedure, e.g. if the
network is unable to get the IMSI based on the TMSI and LAI used as
identification by the mobile station (see subclause 4.3.3).

#### 4.4.4.3 Authentication by the network

The authentication procedure (see subclause 4.3.2) may be initiated by
the network upon receipt of the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message from
the mobile station. (See the cases defined in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\]).

#### 4.4.4.4 Security mode setting by the network

In A/Gb mode, the security mode setting procedure (see
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.4.7) may be initiated by the network,
e.g., if a new TMSI has to be allocated.

In Iu mode, the security mode control procedure (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]) may be initiated by
the network, e.g., if a new TMSI has to be allocated.

#### 4.4.4.5 Location Update Attempt Counter

To limit the number of consecutive unsuccessful location updating
attempts, an location update attempt counter is used. The location
update attempt counter counts the number of consecutive unsuccessful
location updating attempts.

The location update attempt counter shall be incremented as specified in
subclause 4.4.4.9.

The location update attempt counter shall be reset when:

\- the mobile station is powered on;

\- a SIM/USIM is inserted;

\- a location updating procedure is successfully completed;

\- a location updating procedure is rejected with cause:

a\) \#11, \#12, \#13, \#15 or \#25 (see subclause 4.4.4.7);

b\) \#22 and T3346 value IE indicating neither zero nor deactivated (see
subclause 4.4.4.7);

> \- a normal or periodic routing area updating procedure or combined
> routing updating is not accepted by the network with cause \#11, \#12,
> \#13, \#15 or \#25 (see subclause 4.7.5.1.4 and 4.7.5.2.4);
>
> \- GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure is not accepted by
> the network with cause \#11, \#12, \#13, or \#15 (see
> subclause 4.7.3.1.4 and 4.7.3.2.4);
>
> \- service request procedure is not accepted by the network with cause
> \#12, \#13, or \#15 (see subclause 4.7.13.4);
>
> \- network initiated GPRS detach procedure is completed with cause
> \#12, \#13, or \#15 (see subclause 4.7.4.2.2);

\- combined GPRS attach or combined routing area updating procedure is
successful for GPRS and non-GPRS services; or

\- a new PLMN is selected.

and additionally when the mobile station is in the state MM IDLE
sub-state ATTEMPTING to UPDATE:

\- a new location area is entered;

\- expiry of timer T3212;

\- a location updating procedure is triggered by CM sublayer requests;
or

\- timer T3246 is started.

The location update attempt counter shall be used when deciding whether
to re-attempt a location updating procedure after expiry of timer T3211
as specified in subclause 4.4.4.9.

#### 4.4.4.6 Location updating accepted by the network

If the location updating is accepted by the network a LOCATION UPDATING
ACCEPT message is transferred to the mobile station.

In case the identity confidentiality service is active (see
subclauses 4.3.1 and 4.4.4.4), the TMSI reallocation may be part of the
location updating procedure. The TMSI allocated is then contained in the
LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message together with the location area
identifier LAI. The network shall in this case start the supervision
timer T3250 as described in subclause 4.3.1.

In a shared network, if the MS is a network sharing supporting MS, the
network shall indicate in the LAI the PLMN identity of the CN operator
that has accepted the location updating; if the MS is a network sharing
non-supporting MS, the network shall indicate the PLMN identity of the
common PLMN (see 3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]).

In a multi-operator core network (MOCN) with common GERAN, the network
shall indicate in the LAI the common PLMN identity (see
3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]).

If the network wishes to prolong the RR connection to allow the mobile
station to initiate MM connection establishment (for example if the
mobile station has indicated in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST that it
has a follow-on request pending) the network shall send \"follow on
proceed\" in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT and start timer T3255.

If the mobile station has indicated \"CS fallback mobile terminating
call\" in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message, the network shall
maintain the RR connection for an implementation dependent duration to
allow for mobile terminating call establishment. If the mobile station
has also indicated in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message that it has
a follow-on request pending, it is implementation dependent whether the
network proceeds with the mobile terminating call establishment or
allows for a mobile initiated MM connection establishment.

The mobile station receiving a LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message shall
store the received location area identification LAI, stop timer T3210,
reset the location update attempt counter and set the update status in
the SIM/USIM to UPDATED. If the message contains an IMSI, the mobile
station is not allocated any TMSI, and shall delete any TMSI in the
SIM/USIM accordingly. If the message contains a TMSI, the mobile station
is allocated this TMSI, and shall store this TMSI in the SIM/USIM and a
TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE shall be returned to the network. If neither
IMSI nor TMSI is received in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message, the
old TMSI if any available shall be kept.

If the MS has initiated the location updating procedure due to manual
CSG selection and receives a LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message, and the
MS sent the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message in a CSG cell, the MS
shall check if the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell are
contained in the Allowed CSG list. If not, the MS shall add that CSG ID
and associated PLMN identity to the Allowed CSG list and the MS may add
the HNB Name (if provided by lower layers) to the Allowed CSG list if
the HNB Name is present in neither the Operator CSG list nor the Allowed
CSG list.

If the LAI or PLMN identity contained in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT
message is a member of the list of \"forbidden location areas for
regional provision of service\", the list of \"forbidden location areas
for roaming\" or the \"forbidden PLMN list\" then such entries shall be
deleted.

If the MS receives the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message from a PLMN for
which a PLMN-specific attempt counter is maintained (see
subclause 4.1.1.6A), then the MS shall reset this counter. If the MS
maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS
services\", then the MS shall reset this counter.

The network may also send a list of \"equivalent PLMNs\" in the LOCATION
UPDATING ACCEPT message. Each entry of the list contains a PLMN code
(MCC+MNC). If the location updating procedure is initiated during a CS
fallback procedure and the network is configured to support the return
to the last registered E-UTRAN PLMN after CS fallback as specified in
3GPP TS 23.272 \[133\], and the PLMN identity which is provided as part
of the RAI contained in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message differs
from the last registered E-UTRAN PLMN identity, the network shall
include the last registered E-UTRAN PLMN identity in the list of
\"equivalent PLMNs\" in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT message.

NOTE 1: The network can determine a location updating procedure is
initiated during a CS fallback procedure as specified in
3GPP TS 23.272 \[133\].

NOTE 2: The last registered E-UTRAN PLMN identity can be derived by the
network as specified in 3GPP TS 23.272 \[133\].

The mobile station shall store the list, as provided by the network,
except that any PLMN code that is already in the \"forbidden PLMN list\"
shall be removed from the \"equivalent PLMNs\" list before it is stored
by the mobile station. If the mobile station is supporting S1 mode, it
shall also remove any PLMN code that is already in the list of
\"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" before storing the list. In
addition the mobile station shall add to the stored list the PLMN code
of the registered PLMN that sent the list. All PLMNs in the stored list
shall be regarded as equivalent to each other for PLMN selection, cell
selection/re-selection and handover. The stored list in the mobile
station shall be replaced on each occurrence of the LOCATION UPDATING
ACCEPT message. If no list is contained in the message, then the stored
list in the mobile station shall be deleted. The list shall be stored in
the mobile station while switched off so that it can be used for PLMN
selection after switch on.

After that, the mobile station shall act according to the presence of
the \"Follow-on proceed\" information element in the LOCATION UPDATING
ACCEPT; if this element is present and the mobile station has a CM
application request pending, it shall send a CM SERVICE REQUEST to the
network and proceed as in subclause 4.5.1.1. Otherwise, it shall start
timer T3240 and enter state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND.

Furthermore, the network may grant authorisation for the mobile station
to use GSM-Cordless Telephony System (CTS) in the Location Area and its
immediate neighbourhood. The mobile should memorise this permission in
non-volatile memory. If the \"CTS permission\" IE is not present in the
message, the mobile is not authorised to use GSM-CTS, and shall
accordingly delete any memorised permission.

NOTE 3: The interaction between CTS and GPRS procedures are not yet
defined.

The network may also send a Local Emergency Numbers List with local
emergency numbers in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT, by including the
Emergency Number List IE. The mobile equipment shall store the Local
Emergency Numbers List, as provided by the network. The Local Emergency
Numbers List stored in the mobile equipment shall be replaced on each
receipt of the Emergency Number List IE. The received Local Emergency
Numbers List shall be provided to the upper layers.

The emergency number(s) received in the Emergency Number List IE are
valid only in networks in the same country as the cell on which this IE
is received. If no list is contained in the LOCATION UPDATING ACCEPT
message, then the stored Local Emergency Numbers List in the mobile
equipment shall be kept, except if the mobile equipment has successfully
registered to a PLMN in a country different from that of the PLMN that
sent the Local Emergency Numbers List.

The mobile equipment shall use the stored Local Emergency Numbers Lt of
emergency numbers received from the network in addition to the emergency
numbers stored on the SIM/USIM or ME to detect that the number dialled
is an emergency number.

NOTE 4: The mobile equipment may use the Local Emergency Numbers List to
assist the end user in determining whether the dialled number is
intended for an emergency service or for another destination, e.g. a
local directory service. The possible interactions with the end user are
implementation specific.

NOTE 5: An MS that supports procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.302 \[156\], can get additional local emergency numbers
through those procedures, which can be used based on operator policy
(see 3GPP TS 24.302 \[156\]) to detect that the number dialled is an
emergency number.

The Local Emergency Numbers List shall be deleted at switch off and
removal of the SIM/USIM. The mobile equipment shall be able to store up
to ten local emergency numbers received from the network.

#### 4.4.4.7 Location updating not accepted by the network

If the location updating cannot be accepted, the network sends a
LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message to the mobile station. The mobile
station receiving a LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message containing a reject
cause other than MM cause value \#25 or the message is integrity
protected, shall stop the timer T3210, store the reject cause, start the
timer T3240, enter state LOCATION UPDATING REJECTED, await the release
of the RR connection triggered by the network, and for all causes except
\#12, \#15, \#22 and \#25 deletes the list of \"equivalent PLMNs\".

If the LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message containing the MM cause value
\#25 was received without integrity protection, then the MS shall
discard the message.

If the location updating is rejected due to general NAS level mobility
management congestion control, the network shall set the MM cause value
to \#22 \"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3246 (see
3GPP TS 23.012 \[140\]).

Upon the release of the RR connection, the mobile station shall take the
following actions depending on the stored reject cause:

\# 2: (IMSI unknown in HLR);

\# 3: (Illegal MS); or

\# 6: (Illegal ME).

The mobile station shall set the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and store it in the SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2), and
delete any TMSI, stored LAI and ciphering key sequence number and shall
consider the SIM/USIM as invalid for non-GPRS services until switch-off
or the SIM/USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in
subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been successfully integrity
checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

\# 11: (PLMN not allowed);

The mobile station shall delete any LAI, TMSI and ciphering key sequence
number stored in the SIM/USIM, reset the location update attempt
counter, and set the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it
in the SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2). The mobile station
shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and if the
MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall start timer T3245 and proceed
as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a
PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set this
counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

The MS shall perform a PLMN selection when back to the MM IDLE state
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to performing a PLMN selection from this
list according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

\# 12: (Location Area not allowed);

The mobile station shall delete any LAI, TMSI and ciphering key sequence
number stored in the SIM/USIM, reset the location update attempt
counter, and set the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it
in the SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2).

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for regional provision of service\".

The MS shall perform a cell selection when back to the MM IDLE state
according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 1: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

\# 13: (Roaming not allowed in this location area).

The mobile station shall reset the location update attempt counter, and
set the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it in the
SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2).

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\".

The mobile station shall perform a PLMN selection instead of a cell
selection when back to the MM IDLE state according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to performing a PLMN selection from this
list according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

\# 15: (No Suitable Cells In Location Area).

The mobile station shall reset the location update attempt counter, set
the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it in the SIM/USIM
according to subclause 4.1.2.2).

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\".

The mobile station shall search for a suitable cell in another location
area or a tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

NOTE 2: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

\# 22: (Congestion).

If the T3246 value IE is present in the LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message
and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated,
the mobile station shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall
be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the MS for this
case is specified in subclause 4.4.4.9.

The mobile station shall abort the location updating procedure, reset
the location update attempt counter, set the MM update status to U2 NOT
UPDATED and change to state MM IDLE sub-state ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE.

The MS shall stop timer T3246 if it is running.

If the LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message is integrity protected, the
mobile station shall start timer T3246 with the value provided in the
T3246 value IE.

If the LOCATION UPDATING REJECT message is not integrity protected, the
mobile station shall start timer T3246 with a random value from the
default range specified in table 11.1.

The mobile station stays in the current serving cell and applies the
normal cell reselection process. The MM connection establishment is
started, if still necessary, when timer T3246 expires or is stopped.

\# 25: (Not authorized for this CSG ).

Cause \#25 is only applicable in UTRAN Iu mode and when received from a
CSG cell. Other cases are considered as abnormal cases and the
specification of the mobile station behaviour is given in
subclause 4.4.4.9.

The MS shall reset the location update attempt counter, and set the
update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and store it in the SIM/USIM
according to subclause 4.1.2.2).

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message are contained in the Allowed
CSG list stored in the MS, the MS shall remove the entry corresponding
to this CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the Allowed CSG list.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message are contained in the Operator
CSG list, the MS shall proceed as specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]
subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

Other values are considered as abnormal cases and the specification of
the mobile station behaviour in those cases is given in
subclause 4.4.4.9.

#### 4.4.4.8 Release of RR connection after location updating

When the Location updating procedure is finished (see subclauses 4.4.4.6
and 4.4.4.7) the mobile station shall (except in the case where the
mobile has a follow-on CM application request pending and has received
the follow-on proceed indication, see subclause 4.4.4.6) set timer T3240
and enter the state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND, expecting the release of
the RR connection. The network may decide to keep the RR connection for
network initiated establishment of a MM connection, or to allow for
mobile initiated MM connection establishment.

Any release of the RR connection shall be initiated by the network
according to subclause 3.5 in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], and
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]. If the RR connection is not released within a
given time controlled by the timer T3240, the mobile station shall abort
the RR connection. In both cases, either after a RR connection release
triggered from the network side or after a RR connection abort requested
by the MS-side, the MS shall return to state MM IDLE.

At transition to state MM IDLE, substates NORMAL SERVICE or RECEIVING
GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE) or ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE either timer T3212
or timer T3211 is started as described in subclause 4.4.4.9, or, timer
T3246 is started as described in subclauses 4.4.4.7, 4.4.4.9 and
4.5.1.1.

If the MS receives the \"Extended wait time\" for CS domain from the
lower layers when no location updating or CM service request procedure
is ongoing, the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

#### 4.4.4.9 Abnormal cases on the mobile station side

The different abnormal cases that can be identified are the following:

a\) Access barred because of access class control or EAB

The location updating procedure is not started. The mobile station stays
in the current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process.
The procedure is started as soon as possible and if still necessary
(when the barred state is ended or because of a cell change).

b\) The answer to random access is an IMMEDIATE ASSIGNMENT REJECT message
(A/Gb mode only)

The location updating is not started. The mobile station stays in the
chosen cell and applies normal cell selection process. The waiting timer
T3122 is reset when a cell change occurs. The procedure is started as
soon as possible after T3122 timeout if still necessary.

c\) Random access failure (A/Gb mode only)

Timer T3213 is started. When it expires the procedure is attempted again
if still necessary.

NOTE 1: As specified in 3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\], a cell reselection then
takes place, with return to the cell inhibited for 5 seconds if there is
at least one other suitable cell. Typically the selection process will
take the mobile station back to the cell where the random access failed
after 5 seconds.

If at the expiry of timer T3213 a new cell has not been selected due to
the lack of valid information (see 3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\]), the mobile
station may as an option delay the repeated attempt for up to 8 seconds
to allow cell re-selection to take place. In this case the procedure is
attempted as soon as a new cell has been selected or the mobile station
has concluded that no other cell can be selected.

If random access failure occurs for two successive random access
attempts for location updating the mobile station proceeds as specified
below.

d\) RR connection failure

The procedure is aborted and the mobile station proceeds as specified
below.

e\) T3210 timeout

The procedure is aborted, the RR connection is aborted and the MS
proceeds as specified below.

f\) RR release without \"Extended Wait Time\" received from lower layers
before the normal end of procedure

The procedure is aborted and the mobile station proceeds as specified
below, except in the following implementation option case f.1.

f.1) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with, for
example, cause \"Normal\", \"User inactivity\" or \"Directed signalling
connection re-establishment\" (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP
TS 44.118 \[111\])

The location updating procedure shall be initiated again, if the
following conditions apply:

i\) The original location updating procedure was initiated over an
existing RRC connection; and

ii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the CS signalling connection (e.g. CS
authentication procedures, see subclause 4.3.2), were received after the
LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message was transmitted.

NOTE 2: The RRC connection release cause that triggers the re-initiation
of the location updating procedure is implementation specific.

g\) Location updating reject, other causes than those treated in
subclause 4.4.4.7, and cases of MM cause values \#22 and \#25, if
considered as abnormal cases according to subclause 4.4.4.7

Upon reception of the cause codes \#22, \# 95, \# 96, \# 97, \# 99 and
\# 111 the MS should set the location update attempt counter to 4. The
MS waits for release of the RR connection as specified in
subclause 4.4.4.8.

The MS shall proceed as described below.

h\) RR connection establishment failure without \"Extended Wait Time\"
received from lower layers (Iu mode only)

The procedure is aborted and the mobile station proceeds as specified
below.

NOTE 3: Case h) covers all cases when the signalling connection cannot
be established, including random access failure and access reject. As
the RRC protocol has error specific retransmission mechanisms (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]), there is no need to distinguish between the
different error cases within MM.

i\) \"Extended wait time\" for CS domain from the lower layers

The MS shall abort the location updating procedure and stop timer T3210
if still running.

If the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message contained the low priority
indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\",
the MS shall start timer T3246 with the \"Extended wait time\" value and
reset the location update attempt counter.

In other cases the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

Additionally, the MS shall set the MM update status to U2 NOT UPDATED
and change to state MM IDLE sub-state ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE. The MS stays
in the current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process.
The location updating procedure is started, if still necessary, when
timer T3246 expires or is stopped, and the MS proceeds as specified
below.

j\) Timer T3246 is running

The location updating procedure shall not be initiated unless the MS is
establishing an emergency call or the MS is an MS configured to use AC11
-- 15 in selected PLMN. The MS stays in the current serving cell and
applies normal cell reselection process. The location updating procedure
is started, if still necessary, when timer T3246 expires or is stopped.

In cases d) to i) (except in the case f.1 and except in the case i) when
timer T3246 is started) above, and, for repeated failures as defined in
c) above, the mobile station proceeds as follows. Timer T3210 is stopped
if still running. The RR Connection is aborted in case of timer T3210
timeout. The location update attempt counter is incremented. The next
actions depend on the Location Area Identities (stored and received from
the BCCH of the current serving cell) and the value of the location
update attempt counter.

-- the update status is UPDATED, and the stored LAI is equal to the one
received on the BCCH from the current serving cell and the location
update attempt counter is smaller than 4:

The mobile station shall keep the update status to UPDATED, the MM IDLE
sub-state after the RR connection release is NORMAL SERVICE. The mobile
station shall memorize the location updating type used in the location
updating procedure. It shall start timer T3211 when the RR connection is
released. When timer T3211 or T3246 expires the location updating
procedure is triggered again with the memorized location updating type;

-- either the update status is different from UPDATED, or the stored LAI
is different from the one received on the BCCH from the current serving
cell, or the location update attempt counter is greater or equal to 4:

When the RR connection is released the mobile station shall delete any
LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence number stored in the SIM/USIM, and set
the update status to NOT UPDATED. A mobile station which is not a GPRS
MS shall also delete the list of equivalent PLMNs. The mobile station
shall enter the MM IDLE sub-state ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE (see
subclause 4.2.2.2 for the subsequent actions) or optionally the MM IDLE
sub-state PLMN SEARCH (see subclause 4.2.1.2) in order to perform a PLMN
selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]. If the location update
attempt counter is smaller than 4, the mobile station shall memorize
that timer T3211 is to be started when the RR connection is released,
otherwise it shall memorize that timer T3212 is to be started when the
RR connection is released.

#### 4.4.4.10 Abnormal cases on the network side

a\) RR connection failure

If a RR connection failure occurs during a common procedure integrated
with the location updating procedure, the behaviour of the network
should be according to the description of that common procedure.

If a RR connection failure occurs when a common procedure does not
exist, the location updating procedure towards the mobile station should
be aborted.

b\) protocol error

If the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message is received with a protocol
error, the network should, if possible, return a LOCATION UPDATING
REJECT message with one of the following Reject causes:

\#96: Mandatory information element error

\#99: Information element non-existent or not implemented

\#100: Conditional IE error

\#111: Protocol error, unspecified

Having sent the response, the network should start the channel release
procedure (see subclause 3.5).

![](media/image12.png){width="3.8333333333333335in"
height="0.9583333333333334in"}

Figure 4.5/3GPP TS 24.008: Location updating sequence

### 4.4.5 Void

### 4.4.6 Void

### 4.4.7 eCall inactivity procedure

The eCall inactivity procedure is applicable only to an eCall only
mobile station (as determined by information configured in USIM). The
procedure shall be started when:

\- the mobile station is in any MM Idle state except NO IMSI, NO CELL
AVAILABLE or PLMN SEARCH;

\- the mobile station is in GMM-NULL or GMM-DEREGISTERED state; and

\- one of the following conditions applies:

\- timer T3242 expires or is found to have already expired and T3243 is
not running;

\- timer T3243 expires or is found to have already expired and T3242 is
not running; or

\- timer T3242 and timer T3243 expire or are found to have already
expired.

The mobile station shall then stop other running timers (e.g. T3211,
T3212, T3213) and shall perform the IMSI detach procedure if required by
the serving network and if the update state is U1. The mobile station
then enters MM Idle eCALL INACTIVE state and the mobile station shall
delete any LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence number stored in the
SIM/USIM and set the update state to U4 Updating Disabled.

While in eCALL INACTIVE state, the mobile station maintains awareness of
a potential serving cell in a potential serving network but initiates no
MM signalling with the network and ignores any paging requests.

The mobile station shall leave eCALL INACTIVE state only when one of the
following events occur:

\- if the SIM or USIM is removed, the mobile station enters the NO IMSI
state;

\- if coverage is lost, the mobile station enters PLMN SEARCH state;

\- if the mobile station is deactivated (e.g. powered off) by the user:
the mobile station enters the NULL state;

\- if there is a CM request for an emergency services call: the mobile
station should follow the procedure for return to state MM-IDLE in
subclause 4.2.3 and attempt a location update. The MS then uses the MM
and CM procedures to establish the emergency call at the earliest
opportunity; or

NOTE 1: If an eCall only device has not successfully completed a
location update procedure, PSAP callback will not be possible due to its
calling line identity being unavailable at the PSAP.

NOTE 2: An eCall only device uses the CS domain to originate an
emergency services call when in A/Gb or Iu mode, even if the device is
capable of eCall over IMS.

\- if there is a CM request for a call to an HPLMN designated
non-emergency MSISDN for the purpose of accessing test and terminal
reconfiguration services: the mobile station follows the procedure for
return to state MM-IDLE in subclause 4.2.3 and attempts a normal
location update. Once this is complete, further MM and CM procedures are
used to establish the non-emergency call.

NOTE 3: An eCall only device uses the CS domain to originate a call to
an HPLMN designated non-emergency MSISDN for the purpose of accessing
test and terminal reconfiguration services when in A/Gb or Iu mode, even
if the device is capable of eCall over IMS.

4.5 Connection management sublayer service provision 
-----------------------------------------------------

The concept of MM connection is introduced in this subclause. This
concept is mainly a descriptive tool: The establishment of an MM
connection by the network can be local (i.e. it is achieved by the
transmission of the first CM layer message and without the transmission
of any MM layer messages) or can be achieved by the transmission of a CM
SERVICE PROMPT message (eg. in the case of certain ring back services).
The release of an MM connection by the network or by the mobile station
is always local, i.e. these purposes can be achieved without sending any
MM messages over the radio interface. (On the contrary, establishment of
an MM connection by the mobile station requires the sending of MM
messages over the radio interface. An exception is VGCS, where an MM
connection will be established as result of an uplink access procedure
(see subclause 3.7.2.1.1in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]).)

The Mobility Management (MM) sublayer is providing connection management
services to the different entities of the upper Connection management
(CM) sublayer (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]). It offers to a CM entity the
possibility to use an MM connection for the exchange of information with
its peer entity. An MM connection is established and released on request
from a CM entity. Different CM entities communicate with their peer
entity using different MM connections. Several MM connections may be
active at the same time.

An MM connection requires an RR connection. All simultaneous MM
connections for a given mobile station use the same RR connection.

In the following subclauses, the procedures for establishing,
re-establishing, maintaining, and releasing an MM connection are
described, usually separately for the mobile station and the network
side.

### 4.5.1 MM connection establishment

#### 4.5.1.1 MM connection establishment initiated by the mobile station

Upon request of a CM entity to establish an MM connection the MM
sublayer first decides whether to accept, delay, or reject this request:

\- An MM connection establishment may only be initiated by the mobile
station when the following conditions are fulfilled:

\- Its update status is UPDATED.

\- The MM sublayer is in one of the states MM IDLE, RR CONNECTION
RELEASE NOT ALLOWED or MM connection active but not in MM connection
active (Group call).

An exception from this general rule exists for emergency calls (see
subclause 4.5.1.5). A further exception is defined in the following
clause.

\- If an MM specific procedure is running at the time the request from
the CM sublayer is received, and the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST message
has been sent, the request will either be rejected or delayed, depending
on implementation, until the MM specific procedure is finished and,
provided that the network has not sent a \"follow-on proceed\"
indication, the RR connection is released. If the LOCATION UPDATING
REQUEST message has not been sent, the mobile station may include a
\"follow-on request\" indicator in the message. The mobile station shall
then delay the request until the MM specific procedure is completed,
when it may be given the opportunity by the network to use the RR
connection: see subclause 4.4.4.6.

In order to establish an MM connection, the mobile station proceeds as
follows:

a\) If no RR connection exists, the MM sublayer requests the RR sublayer
to establish an RR connection and enters MM sublayer state WAIT FOR RR
CONNECTION (MM CONNECTION). This request contains an establishment cause
and a CM SERVICE REQUEST message. When the establishment of an RR
connection is indicated by the RR sublayer, the MM sublayer of the
mobile station starts timer T3230, gives an indication to the CM entity
that requested the MM connection establishment, and enters MM sublayer
state WAIT FOR OUTGOING MM CONNECTION.

b\) If an RR connection is available, the MM sublayer of the mobile
station sends a CM SERVICE REQUEST message to the network, starts timer
T3230, stops and resets timer T3241, gives an indication to the CM
entity that requested the MM connection establishment, and enters:

\- MM sublayer state WAIT FOR OUTGOING MM CONNECTION, if no MM
connection is active;

\- MM sublayer state WAIT FOR ADDITIONAL OUTGOING MM CONNECTION, if at
least one MM connection is active;

\- If an RR connection exists but the mobile station is in the state
WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND then any requests from the CM layer that are
received will either be rejected or delayed until this state is left.

c\) Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS talking:

If a mobile station which is in the MM sublayer state MM IDLE, service
state RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE), receives a request from the
GCC sublayer to perform an uplink access, the MM sublayer requests the
RR sublayer to perform an uplink access procedure and enters MM sublayer
state WAIT FOR RR CONNECTION (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE).

When a successful uplink access is indicated by the RR sublayer, the MM
sublayer of the mobile station gives an indication to the GCC sublayer
and enters MM sublayer state MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE).

When an uplink access reject is indicated by the RR sublayer, the MM
sublayer of the mobile station gives an indication to the GCC sublayer
and enters the MM sublayer state MM IDLE, service state RECEIVING GROUP
CALL (NORMAL SERVICE).

In the network, if an uplink access procedure is performed, the RR
sublayer in the network provides an indication to the MM sublayer
together with the mobile subscriber identity received in the TALKER
INDICATION message. The network shall then enter the MM sublayer state
MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE).

d\) When the MS is IMSI attached for CS services via EMM combined
procedures, as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], and the MS is
camping on an E-UTRAN cell, and if T3246 is not running, the MM sublayer
requests EMM to initiate a service request procedure for CS fallback.
The MM connection establishment is delayed until the MS changes to a
GERAN or UTRAN cell.

If the MS enters a GERAN or UTRAN cell, then the MS shall initiate the
MM connection establishment and send a CM SERVICE REQUEST message. The
MS shall include the Additional update parameters information element
indicating \"CS fallback mobile originating call\". If the MS determines
that it is in a different location area than the stored location area,
the MS shall first initiate a normal location updating procedure
regardless of Network Mode of Operation. If the location area of the
current cell is not available, the MS may initiate a normal location
updating procedure directly. The MM connection establishment is delayed
until successful completion of the normal location updating procedure.
Additionally the MS performs routing area updating as specified in
subclause 4.7.5. If the normal location updating procedure is initiated,
the MS shall indicate the \"follow-on request pending\", shall include
the Additional update parameters information element indicating\"CS
fallback mobile originating call\", and shall not include the MS network
feature support information element in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST
message.

In case a, b and d, the CM SERVICE REQUEST message contains the:

\- mobile identity according to subclause 10.5.1.4;

\- mobile station classmark 2;

\- ciphering key sequence number; and

\- CM service type identifying the requested type of transaction (e.g.
mobile originating call establishment, emergency call establishment,
short message service, supplementary service activation, location
services).

A MS supporting eMLPP may optionally include a priority level in the CM
SERVICE REQUEST message.

For MM connection establishment involving a shared GERAN network in A/Gb
mode, if the MS is a GERAN network sharing supporting MS, the chosen
PLMN identity shall be indicated to the GERAN in the CM SERVICE REQUEST
message using the Skip Indicator IE as specified in subclause 10.3.1.

A collision may occur when a CM layer message is received by the mobile
station in MM sublayer state WAIT FOR OUTGOING MM CONNECTION or in WAIT
FOR ADDITIONAL OUTGOING MM CONNECTION. In this case the MM sublayer in
the MS shall establish a new MM connection for the incoming CM message
as specified in subclause 4.5.1.3.

Upon receiving a CM SERVICE REQUEST message, the network shall analyse
its content. The type of semantic analysis may depend on other on going
MM connection(s). Depending on the type of request and the current
status of the RR connection, the network may start any of the MM common
procedures and RR procedures.

In A/Gb mode, the network may initiate the classmark interrogation
procedure, for example, to obtain further information on the mobile
station\'s encryption capabilities.

The identification procedure (see subclause 4.3.3) may be invoked for
instance if a TMSI provided by the mobile station is not recognized.

The network may invoke the authentication procedure (see
subclause 4.3.2) depending on the CM service type.

In A/Gb mode, the network decides also if the ciphering mode setting
procedure shall be invoked (see subclause 3.4.7 in
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]).

In Iu mode, the network decides also if the security mode control
procedure shall be invoked (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

NOTE 1: If the CM\_SERVICE\_REQUEST message contains a priority level
the network may use this to perform queuing and pre-emption as defined
in 3GPP TS 23.067 \[88\].

In A/Gb mode, the MS shall consider the MM connection establishment to
be completed when:

\- receiving an indication from the RR sublayer that the ciphering mode
setting procedure is completed; or

\- receiving a CM SERVICE ACCEPT message.

In Iu mode, the MS shall consider the MM connection establishment to be
completed when

\- receiving an indication from the RR sublayer that the security mode
control procedure is completed, except for the case when it is the first
security mode control procedure after successful inter-system change
received in MM sublayer state WAIT FOR ADDITIONAL OUTGOING MM
CONNECTION; or

\- receiving a CM SERVICE ACCEPT message.

The procedures in subclause 4.1.1.1.1 shall always have precedence over
this subclause.

In Iu mode, during a MM connection establishment for all services,
except for emergency call (see subclause 4.1.1.1.1), the security mode
control procedure with activation of integrity protection shall be
invoked by the network unless integrity protection is already started
(see subclause 4.1.1.1.1).

The MM connection establishment is completed, timer T3230 shall be
stopped, the CM entity that requested the MM connection shall be
informed, and MM sublayer state MM CONNECTION ACTIVE is entered. The MM
connection is considered to be active.

If the service request cannot be accepted, the network returns a CM
SERVICE REJECT message to the mobile station.

The reject cause information element (see subclause 10.5.3.6 and annex
G) indicates the reason for rejection. The following cause values may
apply:

\#4: IMSI unknown in VLR

\#6: Illegal ME

\#17: Network failure

\#22: Congestion

\#25 Not authorized for this CSG

\#32: Service option not supported

\#33: Requested service option not subscribed

\#34: Service option temporarily out of order

If the service request is rejected due to general NAS level mobility
management congestion control, the network shall set the MM cause value
to \#22 \"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3246 (see
3GPP TS 23.012 \[140\]).

If no other MM connection is active, the network may start the RR
connection release (see subclause 3.5 of 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] (A/Gb
mode only), 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] (UTRAN Iu mode only), or in
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\] (GERAN Iu mode only) when the CM SERVICE REJECT
message is sent.

If a CM SERVICE REJECT message is received by the mobile station, timer
T3230 shall be stopped, the requesting CM sublayer entity informed. Then
the mobile station shall proceed as follows:

\- If the cause value is not \#4 or \#6 or \#25 received from a CSG cell
and the MS is in UTRAN Iu mode, the MM sublayer returns to the previous
state (the state where the request was received). Other MM connections
shall not be affected by the CM SERVICE REJECT message.

\- If cause value \#4 is received, the mobile station aborts any MM
connection, deletes any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number in
the SIM/USIM, changes the update status to NOT UPDATED (and stores it in
the SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2), and enters the MM sublayer
state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND. If subsequently the RR connection is
released or aborted, this will force the mobile station to initiate a
normal location updating). Whether the CM request shall be memorized
during the location updating procedure, is a choice of implementation.

\- If cause value \#6 is received, the mobile station aborts any MM
connection, deletes any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number in
the SIM/USIM, changes the update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
stores it in the SIM/USIM according to subclause 4.1.2.2), and enters
the MM sublayer state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND. The mobile station shall
consider the SIM/USIM as invalid for non-GPRS services until switch-off
or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

\- If cause value \#22 is received, the T3246 value IE is present in the
CM SERVICE REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is
neither zero nor deactivated, the MS shall check whether the CM SERVICE
REJECT message with cause \#22 is integrity protected and shall stop
timer T3246 if it is running. If the message is integrity protected, the
MS shall start timer T3246 with the value provided in the T3246 value
IE. Otherwise, the MS shall start timer T3246 with a random value from
the default range specified in table 11.1.The MS stays in the current
serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process. The service
request procedure may be started by CM layer, if it is still necessary,
when timer T3246 expires or is stopped.

If cause value \#22 is received, the T3246 value IE is not present in
the CM SERVICE REJECT message or if the T3246 value IE the value
indicates that this timer is zero or deactivated, the same actions as on
timer expiry in subclause 4.5.1.2 shall be taken by the mobile station.

\- If cause value \#25 is received from a CSG cell and the MS is in
UTRAN Iu mode, the MS shall check whether the CM SERVICE REJECT message
with cause \#25 is integrity protected. If the message is not integrity
protected, the MS shall discard the message. Otherwise, the MS shall
abort any MM connection, remove the entry corresponding to the CSG ID
and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has sent the CM
SERVICE REQUEST message from the Allowed CSG list if the CSG ID and
associated PLMN identity are contained in the Allowed CSG list, and
enter the MM sublayer state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND. If the CSG ID and
associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has sent the CM
SERVICE REQUEST message is contained in the Operator CSG list, the MS
shall proceed as specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] subclause 3.1A.
Subsequently, after the RR connection is released or aborted, the MS
applies normal cell reselection process.

If cause value \#25 is received and the cell is not a CSG cell or the MS
is not in UTRAN Iu mode, the MS shall discard the CM SERVICE REJECT
message.

#### 4.5.1.2 Abnormal cases

Mobile station side:

a\) RR connection failure without \"Extended Wait Time\" received from
lower layers or IMSI deactivation

If an RR connection failure occurs, except in the following
implementation option case a.1, or the IMSI is deactivated during the
establishment of an MM connection, the MM connection establishment is
aborted, timers T3230 is stopped, and an indication is given to the CM
entity that requested the MM connection establishment. This shall be
treated as a rejection for establishment of the new MM connection, and
the MM sublayer shall release all active MM connections.

a.1) RR connection failure in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release)
with, for example, cause \"Normal\", \"User inactivity\" or \"Directed
signalling connection re-establishment\" (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The MM connection establishment procedure shall be initiated again, if
the following conditions apply:

i\) The original MM connection establishment was initiated over an
existing RRC connection; and

ii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the CS signalling connection (e.g. CS
authentication procedures, see subclause 4.3.2), were received after the
CM SERVICE REQUEST message was transmitted.

NOTE 1: The RRC connection release cause that triggers the re-initiation
of the MM connection establishment procedure is implementation specific.

b\) T3230 expiry

If T3230 expires (i.e. no response is given but a RR connection is
available) the MM connection establishment is aborted and the requesting
CM sublayer is informed. If no other MM connection exists then the
mobile station shall proceed as described in subclause 4.5.3.1 for
release of the RR connection. Otherwise the mobile station shall return
to the MM sublayer state where the request of an MM connection was
received, i.e. to MM sublayer state MM connection active. Other ongoing
MM connections (if any) shall not be affected.

c\) Reject cause values \#95, \#96, \#97, \#99, \#100, \#111 received

The same actions as on timer expiry shall be taken by the mobile
station.

d\) Random access failure or RR connection establishment failure without
\"Extended Wait Time\" received from lower layers

If the mobile station detects a random access failure or RR connection
establishment failure during the establishment of an MM connection, it
aborts the MM connection establishment and gives an indication to the CM
entity that requested the MM connection establishment.

NOTE 2: Further actions of the mobile station depend on the RR
procedures and MM specific procedures during which the abnormal
situation has occurred and are described together with those procedures.

e\) Access barred because of access class control or EAB

The MM connection establishment shall not be initiated. The MS stays in
the current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process.
The MM connection establishment may be initiated by CM layer if it is
still necessary, i.e. when access is granted or because of a cell
change.

f\) Indication that a CS fallback to GERAN or UTRAN has failed

If EMM indicates that the CS fallback to GERAN or UTRAN failed, the MM
sublayer shall abort the MM connection establishment and inform the
requesting CM sublayer.

> g\) \"Extended wait time\" for CS domain from the lower layers

The MS shall abort the MM connection establishment and stop timer T3230
if still running.

If the CM SERVICE REQUEST message contained the low priority indicator
set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\", the MS
shall start timer T3246 with the \"Extended wait time\" value.

In other cases the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

The MM connection establishment is started, if still necessary, when
timer T3246 expires or is stopped.

h\) Timer T3246 is running

The MM connection establishment shall not be initiated unless the MS is
establishing an emergency call or the MS is an MS configured to use AC11
-- 15 in selected PLMN. The MS stays in the current serving cell and
applies normal cell reselection process. The MM connection establishment
is started, if still necessary, when timer T3246 expires or is stopped.

Network side:

a\) RR connection failure

The actions to be taken upon RR connection failure within a MM common
procedure are described together with that procedure. A RR connection
failure occurring outside such MM common procedures, shall trigger the
release of all active MM connections if any.

b\) Invalid message or message content

Upon reception of an invalid initial message or a CM SERVICE REQUEST
message with invalid content, a CM SERVICE REJECT message shall be
returned with one of the following appropriate Reject cause indications:

\# 95: Semantically incorrect message

\# 96: Mandatory information element error

\# 97: Message type non-existent or not implemented

\# 99: Information element non-existent or not implemented

\# 100: Conditional IE error

\# 111: Protocol error, unspecified

When the CM SERVICE REJECT message has been sent, the network may start
RR connection release if no other MM connections exist or if the
abnormal condition also has influence on the other MM connections.

#### 4.5.1.3 MM connection establishment initiated by the network

##### 4.5.1.3.1 Mobile Terminating CM Activity 

When a CM sublayer entity in the network requests the MM sublayer to
establish a MM connection, the MM sublayer will request the
establishment of an RR connection to the RR sublayer if no RR connection
to the desired mobile station exists. The MM sublayer is informed when
the paging procedure is finished (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]
subclause 3.3.2 and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) and the mobile station shall
enter the MM state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND and stop the timer T3246 if
running.

In A/Gb mode, when an RR connection is established (or if it already
exists at the time the request is received), the MM sublayer may
initiate any of the MM common procedures (except IMSI detach); it may
request the RR sublayer to perform the RR classmark interrogation
procedure, and/or the security mode setting procedure.

In Iu mode, when an RR connection is established (or if it already
exists at the time the request is received), the MM sublayer may
initiate any of the MM common procedures (except IMSI detach); it may
request the RR sublayer to perform the security mode control procedure.

When all MM and RR procedures are successfully completed which the
network considers necessary, the MM sublayer will inform the requesting
mobile terminating CM sublayer entity on the success of the MM
connection establishment.

If an RR connection already exists and no MM specific procedure is
running, the network may also establish a new mobile terminating MM
connection by sending a CM message with a new PD/TI combination.

If the MS receives the first CM message in the MM states WAIT FOR
NETWORK COMMAND or RR CONNECTION RELEASE NOT ALLOWED, the MS shall stop
and reset the timers T3240 and T3241 and shall enter the MM state MM
CONNECTION ACTIVE.

In A/Gb mode, if the establishment of an RR connection is unsuccessful,
or if any of the MM common procedures or the security mode setting fail,
this is indicated to the CM layer with an appropriate error cause.

In Iu mode, if the establishment of an RR connection is unsuccessful, or
if any of the MM common procedures or the security mode control fail,
this is indicated to the CM layer with an appropriate error cause.

If an RR connection used for a MM specific procedure exists to the
mobile station, the CM request may be rejected or delayed depending on
implementation. When the MM specific procedure has been completed, the
network may use the same RR connection for the delayed CM request.

Only applicable in case of VGCS talking:

In the MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE) the mobile station is
in RR Group transmit mode. There shall be only one MM connection active.

When in MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE) state, the MM
sublayer in the network shall reject the request for the establishment
of another MM connection by any CM layer.

If the RR sublayer in the network indicates a request to perform a
transfer of the mobile station from RR connected mode to RR Group
transmit mode which will result in a transition from MM CONNECTION
ACTIVE state to MM CONNECTION ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE) state in the
MM sublayer, the MM sublayer shall not allow the transition if more than
one MM connection is active with the mobile station.

##### 4.5.1.3.2 Mobile Originating CM Activity \$(CCBS)\$

When a CM sublayer entity in the network requests the MM sublayer to
establish a MM connection, the MM sublayer will request the
establishment of an RR connection to the RR sublayer if no RR connection
to the desired mobile station exists. The MM sublayer is informed when
the paging procedure is finished (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]
subclause 3.3.2 and 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) and the mobile station shall
enter the MM state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND.

In A/Gb mode, when an RR connection is established (or if it already
exists at the time the request is received), the MM sublayer may
initiate any of the MM common procedures (except IMSI detach), it may
request the RR sublayer to perform the RR classmark interrogation
procedure and/or the security mode setting procedure.

In Iu mode, when an RR connection is established (or if it already
exists at the time the request is received), the MM sublayer may
initiate any of the MM common procedures (except IMSI detach), it may
request the RR sublayer to perform the security mode control procedure.

The network should use the information contained in *the Mobile Station
Classmark Type* 2 IE on the mobile station\'s support for \"Network
Initiated MO CM Connection Request\" to determine whether to:

not start this procedure (eg if an RR connection already exists), or,

to continue this procedure, or,

to release the newly established RR connection.

In the case of a \"Network Initiated MO CM Connection Request\" the
network shall use the established RR connection to send a CM SERVICE
PROMPT message to the mobile station.

If the mobile station supports \"Network Initiated MO CM Connection
Request\", the MM sublayer of the MS gives an indication to the CM
entity identified by the CM SERVICE PROMPT message and enters the MM
sublayer state PROCESS CM SERVICE PROMPT. In the state PROCESS CM
SERVICE PROMPT the MM sublayer waits for either the rejection or
confirmation of the recall by the identified CM entity. Any other
requests from the CM entities shall either be rejected or delayed until
this state is left.

When the identified CM entity informs the MM sublayer, that it has send
the first CM message in order to start the CM recall procedure the MM
sublayer enters the state MM CONNECTION ACTIVE.

If the identified CM entity indicates that it will not perform the CM
recall procedure and all MM connections are released by their CM
entities the MS shall proceed according to subclause 4.5.3.1.

If the CM SERVICE PROMPT message is received by the MS in MM sublayer
states WAIT FOR OUTGOING MM CONNECTION or in WAIT FOR ADDITIONAL
OUTGOING MM CONNECTION then the mobile station shall send an MM STATUS
message with cause \" Message not compatible with protocol state\".

A mobile that does not support \"Network Initiated MO CM Connection
Request\" shall return an MM STATUS message with cause \#97 \"message
type non-existent or not implemented\" to the network.

If the mobile station supports \"Network Initiated MO CM Connection
Request\" but the identified CM entity in the mobile station does not
provide the associated support, then the mobile station shall send an MM
STATUS message with cause \"Service option not supported\". In the case
of a temporary CM problem (eg lack of transaction identifiers) then the
mobile station shall send an MM STATUS message with cause \"Service
option temporarily out of order\".

If an RR connection already exists and no MM specific procedure is
running, the network may use it to send the CM SERVICE PROMPT message.

In A/Gb mode, if the establishment of an RR connection is unsuccessful,
or if any of the MM common procedures or the security mode setting fail,
this is indicated to the CM layer in the network with an appropriate
error cause.

In Iu mode, if the establishment of an RR connection is unsuccessful, or
if any of the MM common procedures or the security mode control fail,
this is indicated to the CM layer in the network with an appropriate
error cause.

If an RR connection used for a MM specific procedure exists to the
mobile station, the \"Network Initiated MO CM Connection Request\" may
be rejected or delayed depending on implementation. When the MM specific
procedure has been completed, the network may use the same RR connection
for the delayed \"Network Initiated MO CM Connection Request\".

##### 4.5.1.3.3 Paging response in Iu mode (Iu mode only)

The network may initiate the paging procedure for CS services when the
MS is IMSI attached for CS services. To initiate the procedure, the MM
entity requests the RR sublayer to initiate paging (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\], 3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]) for CS services.

At reception of a paging message, the RR sublayer in the MS shall
deliver a paging indication to the MM sublayer if the paging was
initiated by the MM entity in the network (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]
and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]) and the MS shall stop the timer T3246, if
running. The MS shall respond with the PAGING RESPONSE message defined
in 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], subclause 9.1.25. For reasons of backward
compatibility the paging response shall use the RR protocol
discriminator.

If the MS receives a paging request for CS services during an ongoing MM
procedure, and the MS has already requested the establishment of a radio
connection, the MS shall ignore the paging request and the MS and the
network shall continue the MM procedure.

##### 4.5.1.3.4 Paging response for CS fallback

The network may initiate the paging procedure for CS services when the
MS is IMSI attached for CS services via EMM combined procedures, as
described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\].

At reception of an indication of paging for CS services from EMM, the MS
shall stop timer T3246, if it is running. The MM sublayer in the MS
requests EMM to perform the service request procedure for CS fallback.

After the MS changes to a GERAN or UTRAN cell, the MS shall:

\- In A/Gb mode: ask for the establishment of an RR connection and
proceed as if a paging has been received in the lower layers;

\- In Iu mode: ask for the establishment of an RRC connection and
respond with the PAGING RESPONSE message defined in
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\], subclause 9.1.25. For reasons of backward
compatibility the paging response shall use the RR protocol
discriminator.

If the MS determines, before sending the response to paging, that it is
in a different location area than the stored location area, the MS shall
initiate a normal location updating procedure first, regardless of
Network Mode of Operation. Additionally the MS performs routing area
updating as specified in subclause 4.7.5. If the location area of the
current cell is not available, the MS may initiate a normal location
updating procedure directly.

When initiating the location updating procedure, the MS shall indicate
\"CS fallback mobile terminating call\" in the Additional update
parameters IE and the MS shall not include the MS network feature
support IE. The MM connection establishment is delayed until successful
completion of the normal location updating procedure. After the
completion of the normal location updating procedure, the MS shall not
send the PAGING RESPONSE message.

NOTE: For the race condition when the mobile station has a CM
application request pending, the mobile station also indicates that it
has a follow-on request pending.

#### 4.5.1.4 Abnormal cases

The behaviour upon abnormal events is described together with the
relevant RR procedure or MM common procedure.

In addition, the following abnormal events can be identified:

a\) Indication that a CS fallback to GERAN or UTRAN has failed

If EMM indicates that the CS fallback to GERAN or UTRAN failed, the MM
sublayer shall abort the paging response procedure.

b\) Paging message for an MS which is IMSI attached for GPRS and for
non-GPRS services in order to obtain GPRS services and \"SMS-only
service\"

An MS that received the GPRS-SMS indicator set to \"0\" at the last
combined GPRS attach or combined routing area updating procedure may
ignore the paging for CS services.

An MS that requested \"SMS-only service\" in the combined GPRS attach
procedure or combined routing area updating procedure may ignore the
paging for CS services.

NOTE: A network that is compliant with the earlier versions of the
protocol will implicitly indicate to the MS that the delivery of SMS via
GPRS is always supported, i.e. as GPRS-SMS indicator set to \"0\", even
if it does not provide this support to the MS. The MS can learn whether
SMS over GPRS is provided by using the mechanism defined in
3GPP TS 24.011 \[22\], subclause 2.6. If the MS learns that SMS over
GPRS is provided, the MS can ignore paging for CS services.

#### 4.5.1.5 MM connection establishment for emergency calls

A MM connection for an emergency call may be established in all states
of the mobility management sublayer which allow MM connection
establishment for a normal originating call. In addition, establishment
may be attempted in all service states where a cell is selected (see
subclause 4.2.2) but not in the MM CONNECTION ACTIVE state (GROUP
TRANSMIT MODE) state. However, as a network dependent option, a MM
connection establishment for emergency call may be rejected in some of
the states.

When a user requests an emergency call establishment the mobile station
will send a CM SERVICE REQUEST message to the network with a CM service
type information element indicating emergency call establishment. If the
network does not accept the emergency call request, e.g., because IMEI
was used as identification and this capability is not supported by the
network, the network will reject the request by returning a CM SERVICE
REJECT message to the mobile station.

The reject cause information element indicates the reason for rejection.
The following cause values may apply:

\#3 \"Illegal MS\"

\#4 \"IMSI unknown in VLR\"

\#5 \"IMEI not accepted\"

\#6 \" Illegal ME\"

\#17 \"Network failure\"

\#22 \"Congestion\"

\#25 \"Not authorized for this CSG\"

\#32 \"Service option not supported\"

\#34 \"Service option temporarily out of order\"

With the above defined exceptions, the procedures described for MM
connection establishment in subclauses 4.5.1.1 and 4.5.1.2 shall be
followed.

NOTE: Normally, the mobile station will be identified by an IMSI or a
TMSI. However, if none of these identifiers is available in the mobile
station, then the mobile station shall use the IMEI for identification
purposes. The network may in that case reject the request by returning a
CM SERVICE REJECT message with reject cause: \#5 \"IMEI not accepted\".

#### 4.5.1.5a MM connection establishment for emergency calls for CS fallback

When the MS is in NO CELL AVAILABLE state, camped on an E-UTRAN cell,
and IMSI attached for CS services via EMM combined procedures, as
described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], the MM sublayer requests EMM to
initiate a service request procedure for mobile originating CS fallback
emergency call, irrespective of whether timer T3246 is running. The MM
connection establishment is delayed until the mobile station changes to
a GERAN or UTRAN cell. After this point, the behaviour specified in
subclause 4.5.1.5 applies.

When the MS is not IMSI attached for CS services via EMM combined
procedures, as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], and the MS is
camping on an E-UTRAN cell, the MS shall perform any cell selection to
GERAN or UTRAN (see 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\]).
The MM connection establishment is delayed until the MS changes to a
GERAN or UTRAN cell. After this point, the behaviour specified in
subclause 4.5.1.5 applies.

#### 4.5.1.6 Call re-establishment

The re-establishment procedure allows a MS to resume a connection in
progress after a radio link failure, possibly in a new cell and possibly
in a new location area. The conditions in which to attempt call
re-establishment or not depend on the call control state, see
subclause 5.5.4 and, whether or not a cell allowing call
re-establishment has been found (as described in 3GPP TS 45.008 \[34\]).
MM connections are identified by their protocol discriminators and
transaction identifiers: these shall not be changed during call
re-establishment.

The re-establishment takes place when a lower layer failure occurs and
at least one MM connection is active (i.e. the mobile station\'s MM
sublayer is either in state 6 \"MM CONNECTION ACTIVE\" or state 20
\"WAIT FOR ADDITIONAL OUTGOING MM CONNECTION\").

NOTE: During a re-establishment attempt the mobile station does not
return to the MM IDLE state; thus no location updating is performed even
if the mobile is not updated in the location area of the selected cell.

No call re-establishment shall be performed for voice group and
broadcast calls.

##### 4.5.1.6.1 Call re-establishment, initiation by the mobile station

NOTE: The network is unable to initiate call re-establishment.

If at least one request to re-establish an MM connection is received
from a CM entity as a response to the indication that the MM connection
is interrupted (see subclause 4.5.2.3.) the mobile station initiates the
call re-establishment procedure. If several CM entities request
re-establishment only one re-establishment procedure is initiated. If
any CM entity requests re-establishment, then re-establishment of all
transactions belonging to all Protocol Discriminators that permit Call
Re-establishment shall be attempted.

Upon request of a CM entity to re-establish an MM connection the MM
sublayer requests the RR sublayer to establish an RR connection and
enters MM sublayer state WAIT FOR REESTABLISH. This request contains an
establishment cause and a CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. When the
establishment of an RR connection is indicated by the RR sublayer, the
MM sublayer of the mobile station starts timer T3230, gives an
indication to all CM entities that are being re-established, and remains
in the MM sublayer state WAIT FOR REESTABLISH.

The CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message contains the

\- mobile identity according to subclause 10.5.1.4;

\- mobile station classmark 2;

\- ciphering key sequence number.

NOTE: Whether or not a CM entity can request re-establishment depends
upon the Protocol Discriminator. The specifications for Short Message
Service (3GPP TS 24.011 \[22\]), Call Independent Supplementary Services
(3GPP TS 24.010 \[21\]) and Location Services (3GPP TS 44.071 \[23a\])
do not currently specify any re-establishment procedures.

For a shared GERAN in A/Gb mode, if the MS is a GERAN network sharing
supporting MS, the chosen PLMN identity shall be indicated to the GERAN
in the CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message using the Skip Indicator IE
as specified in subclause 10.3.1.

Upon receiving a CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message, the network shall
analyse its content. Depending on the type of request, the network may
start any of the MM common procedures and RR procedures.

The network may initiate the classmark interrogation procedure, for
example, to obtain further information on the mobile station\'s
encryption capabilities.

The identification procedure (see subclause 4.3.3) may be invoked.

The network may invoke the authentication procedure (see
subclause 4.3.2).

In A/Gb mode, the network decides if the security mode setting procedure
shall be invoked (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] subclause 3.4.7).

An indication from the RR sublayer that the security mode setting
procedure is completed, or reception of a CM SERVICE ACCEPT message,
shall be treated as a service acceptance indication by the mobile
station.

In Iu mode, the network decides if the security mode control procedure
shall be invoked (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]). An indication from the RR sublayer that the
security mode control procedure is completed, or reception of a CM
SERVICE ACCEPT message, shall be treated as a service acceptance
indication by the mobile station.

The MM connection re-establishment is completed, timer T3230 shall be
stopped, all CM entities associated with the re-establishment shall be
informed, and MM sublayer state MM CONNECTION ACTIVE is re-entered. All
the MM connections are considered to be active.

If the network cannot associate the re-establishment request with any
existing call for that mobile station, a CM SERVICE REJECT message is
returned with the reject cause:

\#38 \"call cannot be identified\"

If call re-establishment cannot be performed for other reasons, a CM
SERVICE REJECT is returned, the appropriate reject cause may be any of
the following (see annex G):

\# 4 \"IMSI unknown in VLR\";

\# 6 \"illegal ME\";

\#17 \"network failure\";

\#22 \"congestion\";

\#25 \"not authorized for this CSG\";

\#32 \"service option not supported\";

\#34 \"service option temporarily out of order\".

If the service request is rejected due to general NAS level mobility
management congestion control, the network shall set the MM cause value
to \#22 \"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3246 (see
3GPP TS 23.012 \[140\]).

Whatever the reject cause a mobile station receiving a CM SERVICE REJECT
as a response to the CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST shall stop T3230,
release all MM connections and proceed as described in
subclause 4.5.3.1. In addition:

\- if cause value \#4 is received, the mobile station deletes any TMSI,
LAI and ciphering key sequence number in the SIM/USIM, changes the
update status to NOT UPDATED (and stores it in the SIM/USIM according to
subclause 4.1.2.2), and enters the MM sublayer state WAIT FOR NETWORK
COMMAND. If subsequently the RR connection is released or aborted, this
will force the mobile station to initiate a normal location updating.
The CM re-establishment request shall not be memorized during the
location updating procedure.

\- if cause value \#6 is received, the mobile station deletes any TMSI,
LAI and ciphering key sequence number in the SIM/USIM, changes the
update status to ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and stores it in the SIM/USIM
according to subclause 4.1.2.2), and enters the MM sublayer state WAIT
FOR NETWORK COMMAND. The MS shall consider the SIM/USIM as invalid for
non-GPRS services until switch-off or the SIM/USIM is removed.

\- If cause value \# 22 is received, the T3246 value IE is present in
the CM SERVICE REJECT message and the value indicates that this timer is
neither zero nor deactivated, the MS shall abort the re-establishment,
release any MM connections, and proceed as specified in
subclause 4.5.3.1. The MS shall stop timer T3246 if it is running. If
the CM SERVICE REJECT message is integrity protected, the MS shall start
timer T3246 with the value provided in the T3246 value IE. If the CM
SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the MS shall start
timer T3246 with a random value from the default range specified in
table 11.1. The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the
normal cell reselection process. The CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST
procedure should not be restarted when timer T3246 expires or is
stopped.

If cause value \#22 is received, the T3246 value IE is not present in
the CM SERVICE REJECT message or if the value provided in the T3246
value IE indicates that this timer is zero or deactivated, the MS shall
abort the re-establishment, release any MM connections, and proceed as
specified in subclause 4.5.3.1.

\- if cause value \#25 is received from a CSG cell and the mobile
station is in UTRAN Iu mode, the MS shall check whether the CM SERVICE
REJECT message with cause \#25 is integrity protected. If the message is
not integrity protected, the MS shall discard the message. Otherwise,
the MS shall remove the entry corresponding to the CSG ID and associated
PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has sent the CM SERVICE REQUEST
message from the Allowed CSG list if the CSG ID and associated PLMN
identity are contained in the Allowed CSG list, and enter the MM
sublayer state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND. If the CSG ID and associated
PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has sent the CM SERVICE REQUEST
message is contained in the Operator CSG list, the MS shall proceed as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] subclause 3.1A.

If cause value \#25 is received and the cell is not a CSG cell or the MS
is not in UTRAN Iu mode, the MS shall discard the CM SERVICE REJECT
message.

##### 4.5.1.6.2 Abnormal cases

Mobile station side:

a\) Random access failure or RR connection establishment failure

If the mobile station detects a random access failure or RR connection
establishment failure during the re-establishment of an MM connection,
the re-establishment is aborted and all MM connections are released.

b\) RR connection failure

If a RR connection failure occurs, timer T3230 is stopped, the
re-establishment is aborted and all active MM connections are released.

c\) IMSI deactivation

If the IMSI deactivated during the re-establishment attempt then timer
T3230 is stopped, the re-establishment is aborted and all MM connections
are released.

d\) T3230 expires

If T3230 expires (i.e. no response is given but a RR connection is
available) the re-establishment is aborted, all active MM connections
are released and the mobile station proceeds as described in
subclause 4.5.3.1.

e\) Reject causes \#96, \#97, \#99, \#100, \#111 received

The mobile station shall perform the same actions as if timer T3230 had
expired.

Network side:

a\) RR connection failure

If a RR connection failure occurs after receipt of the CM
RE-ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST the network shall release all MM connections.

b\) Invalid message content

Upon reception an invalid initial of message or a CM RE-ESTABLISHMENT
REQUEST message with invalid content, a CM SERVICE REJECT message shall
be returned with one of the following appropriate Reject cause
indications:

\#96: Mandatory information element error

\#99: Information element non-existent or not implemented

\#100: Conditional IE error

\#111: Protocol error, unspecified

When the CM SERVICE REJECT message has been sent, the network shall
release the RR connection.

#### 4.5.1.7 Forced release during MO MM connection establishment

If the mobile station\'s CM layer initiated the MM connection
establishment but the CM layer wishes to abort the establishment prior
to the completion of the establishment phase, the mobile station shall
send a CM SERVICE ABORT message any time after the completion of the RR
connection and not after the first CM message (e.g. SETUP) is sent.

If the first CM message has already been sent, the normal release
procedure defined by the appropriate CM protocol applies and the CM
SERVICE ABORT shall not be sent.

Sending of the CM SERVICE ABORT message is only allowed during the
establishment of the first MM connection, where no other MM connection
exists in parallel. If parallel MM connections exist already, a new
connection establishment cannot be aborted and normal MM connection
release according to subclause 4.5.3 applies after MM connection
establishment.

Upon transmission of the CM SERVICE ABORT message the mobile station
shall stop timer T3230 and shall follow the procedures specified in
subclause 4.5.3.1.

Upon receipt of the CM SERVICE ABORT message the network shall abort
ongoing processes, release the appropriate resources, and unless another
MM connection establishment is pending or an RRLP procedure (see
3GPP TS 44.031 \[23b\]) or LCS procedure over RRC (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) is ongoing, initiate a normal release of the RR
connection.

#### 4.5.1.8 MM connection establishment due to SRVCC or vSRVCC handover

An MM connection can be established locally in the MS due to an SRVCC or
vSRVCC handover (see 3GPP TS 23.216 \[126\]), i.e. without dedicated MM
signalling. That is the case when the MS has:

\- a voice media stream carried over the PS domain that is handed over
to the CS domain in A/Gb mode or Iu mode via SRVCC;

\- a voice media stream and a video media stream of a single session
carried over the PS domain in S1 mode that is handed over to the CS
domain in Iu mode via vSRVCC;

\- a voice media stream and a video media stream of a single session
carried over the PS domain in S1 mode but only the voice media stream is
handed over to the CS domain in A/Gb mode via SRVCC; or

\- a voice media stream carried over the PS domain in N1 mode that is
handed over to the CS domain in Iu mode via 5G-SRVCC handover from
NG-RAN to UTRAN.

An MS in MM state MM IDLE shall establish the MM connection locally when
it receives an indication from lower layers that either a voice only
SRVCC handover or a voice and video SRVCC handover was completed
successfully.

After completing MM connection establishment, the MM layer shall
indicate \"MM connection establishment due to SRVCC handover\" or \"MM
connection establishment due to vSRVCC handover\" to the upper layer and
shall enter state MM CONNECTION ACTIVE.

#### 4.5.1.9 MM connection establishment due to Dual Radio Voice Call Continuity (DRVCC) access transfer

The MM Connection establishment procedures for a dual radio voice call
continuity (DRVCC) access transfer follow the procedures described in
subclause 4.5.1.1 with the following additions:

Upon request from the upper layers to set up a DRVCC call, the MS shall
initiate the MM connection establishment and send a CM SERVICE REQUEST
message. The MS shall include the Additional update parameters
information element indicating \"DRVCC call\". If the MS determines that
it is in a different location area than the stored location area, the MS
shall first initiate a normal location updating procedure regardless of
Network Mode of Operation. The MS shall indicate \"follow-on request
pending\", shall include the Additional update parameters information
element indicating \"DRVCC call\", and shall not include the MS network
feature support information element in the LOCATION UPDATING REQUEST
message.

The network may use the \"DRVCC call\" indication to decide whether to
initiate any of the MM common procedures.

If the MS and the network have an established GSM security context or
UMTS security context, the MS and the network may take the key(s) of the
established security context into use as specified in subclause
4.3.2.7a.

### 4.5.2 MM connection information transfer phase

After the MM connection has been established, it can be used by the CM
sublayer entity for information transfer. According to the protocol
architecture described in 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\], each CM entity will
have its own MM connection. These different MM connections are
identified by the protocol discriminator PD and, additionally, by the
transaction identifier TI.

All MM common procedures may be initiated at any time while MM
connections are active. Except for Short Message Control which uses a
separate layer 2 low priority data link, no priority mechanism is
defined between the CM, MM and RR sublayer messages.

#### 4.5.2.1 Sending CM messages

A CM sublayer entity, after having been advised that a MM connection has
been established, can request the transfer of CM messages. The CM
messages passed to the MM sublayer are then sent to the other side of
the interface with the PD and TI set according to the source entity.

#### 4.5.2.2 Receiving CM messages

Upon receiving a CM message, the MM sublayer will distribute it to the
relevant CM entity according to the PD value and TI value. However, if
the received CM message is the first for the MM connection (identified
by PD and TI), the MM sublayer will in addition indicate to the CM
entity that a new MM connection has been established.

#### 4.5.2.3 Abnormal cases

RR connection failure:

If the RR connection failure occurs during a RR or MM common procedure,
the consequent actions are described together with that procedure.

In other cases, the following applies:

\- Mobile station:

The MM sublayer shall indicate to all CM entities associated with active
MM connections that the MM connection is interrupted, the subsequent
action of the MM sublayer (call re-establishment, see 4.5.1.6, or local
release) will then depend on the decisions by the CM entities.

\- Network:

The MM sublayer shall locally release all active MM connections. As an
option the network may delay the release of all or some of the MM
connections to allow the mobile station to initiate call
re-establishment.

### 4.5.3 MM connection release

An established MM connection can be released by the local CM entity. The
release of the CM connection will then be done locally in the MM
sublayer, i.e. no MM message are sent over the radio interface for this
purpose.

#### 4.5.3.1 Release of associated RR connection

If all MM connections are released by their CM entities, and no RRLP
procedure (see 3GPP TS 44.031 \[23b\]) and no LCS procedure over RRC
(see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) is ongoing, the mobile station shall set
timer T3240 and enter the state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND, expecting the
release of the RR connection.

If all MM connections are released by their CM entities and an RRLP
procedure or LCS procedure over RRC is ongoing, the MS shall start the
timer T3241 and enter the state RR CONNECTION RELEASE NOT ALLOWED.

If the MS is expecting the release of the RR connection in MM state WAIT
FOR NETWORK COMMAND and an RRLP procedure or LCS procedure over RRC is
started, the MS shall stop the timer T3240, start the timer T3241 and
enter the state RR CONNECTION RELEASE NOT ALLOWED.

If the MS is in MM state RR CONNECTION RELEASE NOT ALLOWED and the
ongoing RRLP procedure or LCS procedure over RRC is finished, the MS
shall stop the timer T3241, reset and start the timer T3240 and shall
enter the state WAIT FOR NETWORK COMMAND.

If the MS receives the \"Extended wait time\" for CS domain from the
lower layers when no location updating or CM service request procedure
is ongoing, the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

In the network, if the last MM connection is released by its user, the
MM sublayer may decide to release the RR connection. The RR connection
may be maintained by the network, e.g. in order to establish another MM
connection.

If the RR connection is not released within a given time controlled by
the timer T3240 or T3241, the mobile station shall abort the RR
connection. In both cases, either after a RR connection release
triggered from the network side or after a RR connection abort requested
by the MS-side, the MS shall return to MM IDLE state; the service state
depending upon the current update status as specified in
subclause 4.2.3.

#### 4.5.3.2 Uplink release in a voice group call

(Only applicable for mobile stations supporting VGCS talking:)

If a mobile station which is in the MM sublayer state MM CONNECTION
ACTIVE (GROUP TRANSMIT MODE) receives a request from the GCC sublayer to
perform an uplink release, the MM sublayer requests the RR sublayer to
perform an uplink release procedure and enters the MM sublayer state
RECEIVING GROUP CALL (NORMAL SERVICE).

4.6 Receiving a MM STATUS message by a MM entity.
-------------------------------------------------

If the MM entity of the mobile station receives a MM STATUS message no
state transition and no specific action shall be taken as seen from the
radio interface, i.e. local actions are possible.

With the exceptions described for the responses to the CM SERVICE PROMPT
message, the actions to be taken on receiving a MM STATUS message in the
network are an implementation dependent option.

4.7 Elementary mobility management procedures for GPRS services
---------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.7.1 General

This subclause describes the basic functions offered by the mobility
management (GMM) sublayer at the radio interface (reference point
Um/UU). The functionality is described in terms of timers and
procedures. During GMM procedures, procedures of CM layer services via
the PS domain, e.g. SM, SMS, and SS, are suspended.

#### 4.7.1.1 Lower layer failure

The lower layers shall indicate a logical link failure or an RR sublayer
failure or an RRC sublayer failure to the GMM sublayer. The failure
indicates an error that cannot be corrected by the lower layers.

#### 4.7.1.2 Ciphering of messages (A/Gb mode only)

If ciphering is to be applied on a GMM context, all GMM messages shall
be ciphered except the following messages:

\-- ATTACH REQUEST;

\-- ATTACH REJECT;

\-- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST;

\-- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE;

\-- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE;

\-- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT;

\-- IDENTITY REQUEST;

\-- IDENTITY RESPONSE;

\-- ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST; and

\-- ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT.

#### 4.7.1.2a Integrity protection of layer 3 signalling messages (A/Gb mode only and when integrity protection is required)

##### 4.7.1.2a.1 General

The requirements in subclause 4.7.1.2a are only applicable for MSs and
networks supporting EC-GSM-IoT (see 3GPP TS 43.064 \[159\]).

For the MS, integrity protected signalling is mandatory for the GMM
messages and SM messagres once a valid UMTS security context exists and
has been taken into use. For the network, integrity protected signalling
is mandatory for the GMM messages and SM messages once authentication
and ciphering procedure is initiated by the network. Integrity
protection of all GMM signalling messages and SM messages is the
responsibility of the LLC layer. In addition, the GMM layer protects the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message and the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message by a message authentication code (MAC)
calculated at the GMM layer when an authentication takes place in the
Authentication and Ciphering procedure. This message authentication code
is included in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message and the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message. The GMM layer is always
using the new UMTS security context derived from the AKA taking place in
the Authentication and Ciphering procedure when calculating the message
authentication code (MAC) at GMM layer.

The GMM layer activates integrity protection in the LLC layer by
providing an indication when integrity protection shall be started.

Integrity protection is initiated in the MS upon request from the
network. This is done using the authentication and ciphering procedure
at the GMM layer (3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]).

Details of the integrity protection and verification of GMM signalling
messages are specified in 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\].

##### 4.7.1.2a.2 Integrity checking of GMM signalling messages in the MS

Except the messages listed below, no GMM signalling messages shall be
processed by the receiving GMM entity in the MS or forwarded to the SM
entity, unless the use of integrity protection has been successfully
negotiated:

\- GMM messages:

\- IDENTITY REQUEST (only if the requested identification parameter is
IMSI)

\- ATTACH REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT

\- ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT (if the cause is not \#25)

\- DETACH ACCEPT (for non power-off)

NOTE: These messages are accepted by the MS without integrity
protection, as in certain situations they are sent by the network before
integrity protection can be activated.

All SM messages shall be integrity protected.

Once the integrity protection has been successfully negotiated, the
receiving GMM or SM entity in the MS shall not process any GMM
signalling messages unless they have been successfully integrity checked
by the LLC layer. If GMM signalling messages, having not successfully
passed the integrity check, are received, then the LLC layer in the MS
discards that message. The processing of the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING REQUEST message, at authentication, that has not successfully
passed the integrity check at GMM layer is specified in
subclause 4.7.7.2. If any GMM or SM signalling message is received
without integrity protection even though integrity protection has been
successfully negotiated, then the GMM layer shall discard this message.

##### 4.7.1.2a.3 Integrity checking of layer 3 signalling messages in the network 

Except the messages listed below, no GMM signalling messages shall be
processed by the receiving GMM entity in the network or forwarded to the
SM entity, unless integrity protection has been successfully negotiated:

\- GMM messages:

\- ATTACH REQUEST;

\- IDENTITY RESPONSE (if requested identification parameter is IMSI);

\- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE;

\- DETACH REQUEST;

\- DETACH ACCEPT.

All SM messages are integrity protected.

Once a valid UMTS security context exists, until integrity protection
has been successfully negotiated, the receiving GMM entity in the
network shall process the following GMM signalling messages, even if the
MAC included in the LLC frame carrying the GMM message fails the
integrity check or cannot be verified in the LLC layer, as the UMTS
security context is not available in the network:

\- ATTACH REQUEST;

\- IDENTITY RESPONSE (if requested identification parameter is IMSI);

\- AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE;

\- DETACH REQUEST (if sent before integrity protection has been
activated);

\- DETACH ACCEPT;

\- ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST;

NOTE: These messages are processed by the GMM layer even when the MAC
fails the integrity check or cannot be verified, as in certain
situations they can be sent by the MS protected with an UMTS security
context that is no longer available in the network.

If an ATTACH REQUEST message fails the integrity check, the network
shall authenticate the subscriber before processing the attach request
any further.

If a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message fails the integrity check, the
network shall initiate an re-authentication of the subscriber by
initiating an authentication and ciphering procedure.

Once integrity protection has been successfully negotiated, the
receiving GMM or SM entity in the network shall not process any GMM or
SM signalling messages unless they have been successfully integrity
checked by the LLC layer. If any GMM or SM signalling message, having
not successfully passed the integrity check, is received, then the LLC
layer in the network discards that message. The processing of the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message when authentication is
taking place, that has not successfully passed the integrity check at
GMM layer is specified in subclause 4.7.7.3. If any GMM or SM signalling
message is received, as not integrity protected even though integrity
protection has been successfully negotiated, then the GMM layer shall
discard this message.

##### 4.7.1.2a.4 Establishment of integrity protection of layer 3 signalling messages

Establishment of integrity protection of layer 3 signalling messages and
optionally user plane data is done during the attach procedure. The MS
shall indicate support for integrity protection in the MS network
capability IE included in the ATTACH REQUEST message and the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message to the network.

When an MS sends an ATTACH REQUEST message or a ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message, then if the MS has no UMTS security context, it shall
send the ATTACH REQUEST or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
without integrity protection to the network. If the network supports
integrity protection, then the network activates integrity protection by
initiating an authentication and ciphering procedure. The network
selects an integrity algorithm among the supported integrity algorithms
indicated by the MS in the MS network capability IE. After successful
completion of the authentication and ciphering procedure, all layer 3
signalling messages sent between the MS and network are integrity
protected in the LLC layer using the new UMTS security context.

When an MS sends an ATTACH REQUEST message or a ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message, then if the MS has a UMTS security context, it shall
send the ATTACH REQUEST or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
integrity protected with the current UMTS security context to the
network. The MS shall include the CKSN indicating the current UMTS
security context value in the initial ATTACH REQUEST message or a
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. The MS shall use the integrity
algorithm identified by the stored integrity algorithm identifier. The
network shall check whether the CKSN included in the initial ATTACH
REQUEST message or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message belongs to an
UMTS security context available in the network, and if yes, then the
network re-establishes integrity protection of layer 3 signalling
messages in the LLC layer:

\- by replying with a GMM message (ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT) that is integrity protected in LLC layer by using the current
UMTS security context. From this time onward, all layer 3 signalling
messages exchanged between the MS and the network are sent integrity
protected, except for the messages specified in subclause 4.7.1.2a; or

\- by initiating an authentication and ciphering procedure. This
procedure can be used by the network to select a new integrity algorithm
different from the one currently used by the MS.

NOTE: Even if the message authentication code protecting the ATTACH
REQUEST or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE message in the LLC layer cannot be
verified in the network due to the integrity key and the integrity
algorithm in the LLC layer at the network not having been configured yet
for this MS, the network progresses the attach procedure and the routing
atra updating procedure at the GMM layer anyway without having to run a
new authentication and ciphering procedure if the network decides to
re-use the same encryption- and integrity keys and the same ciphering
and integrity algorithms and not run a re-authentication.

##### 4.7.1.2a.5 Optional establishment of integrity protection in the user plane 

If an MS supports integrity protection of user plane data, then the MS
shall indicate in the MS network capability IE to the network that it
supports integrity protection of user plane data when it sends an ATTACH
REQUEST message or a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. If the network
supports integrity protection of the user plane data, then the network
shall indicate in the ATTACH ACCEPT message or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT message to the MS that integrity protection of user plane data
shall be used.

##### 4.7.1.2a.6 Change of security keys 

When the network initiates a re-authentication to create a new UMTS
security context, the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message and
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message exchanged during the
authentication and ciphering procedure are integrity protected with the
new UMTS security context at GMM layer by including a MAC. The
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message and AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message may be also integrity protected at the LLC
layer using the current UMTS security context, if any. Both UE and
network shall continue to use the current UMTS security context, until
the network initiates a re-authentication in the authentication and
ciphering procedure. The AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message
sent by the network includes the CKSN of the new UMTS security context
to be used. The SGSN shall send the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message integrity protected with the new UMTS security context at GMM
layer by including a MAC, but unciphered. When the UE responds with an
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message, it shall send the message
integrity protected with the new UMTS security context at GMM layer by
including a MAC, but unciphered.

The UE shall take the new UMTS security context and the indicated
integrity algorithm and encryption algorithm received in the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message, into use in the LLC layer
after sending the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message. The
network shall take the new UMTS security context and the indicated
integrity algorithm and encryption algorithm sent in the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message, into use in the LLC layer in the network
after receiving the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message and a
successful check of the RES.

#### 4.7.1.3 P-TMSI signature

The network may assign a P-TMSI signature to an MS in an attach, routing
area update, or P-TMSI reallocation procedure. Only in combination with
a valid P-TMSI, this P-TMSI signature is used by the MS for
authentication and identification purposes in the subsequent attach,
routing area update or detach procedure. If the MS has no valid P-TMSI
it shall not use the P-TMSI signature in the subsequent attach, routing
area update or detach procedure. Upon successful completion of the
subsequent attach or routing area update procedure, the used P-TMSI
signature shall be deleted. Upon completion of an MS initiated detach
procedure, the used P-TMSI signature shall be deleted. Upon completion
of a network initiated detach procedure the P-TMSI signature shall be
kept, unless explicitly specified otherwise in subclause 4.7.4.2.2.

#### 4.7.1.4 Radio resource sublayer address handling

In A/Gb mode, while a packet TMSI (P-TMSI) is used in the GMM sublayer
for identification of an MS, a temporary logical link identity (TLLI) is
used for addressing purposes at the RR sublayer.

In Iu mode a Radio Network Temporary Identity (RNTI) identifies a user
between the MS and the UTRAN or GERAN. The relationship between RNTI and
IMSI is known only in the MS and in the UTRAN, see
3GPP TS 25.301 \[128\].

##### 4.7.1.4.1 Radio resource sublayer address handling (A/Gb mode only)

This subclause describes how the RR addressing is managed by GMM. For
the detailed coding of the different TLLI types and how a TLLI can be
derived from a P-TMSI, see 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\].

If the MS is configured for \"AttachWithIMSI\" as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\] and is entering a new
PLMN which is neither the registered PLMN nor in the list of equivalent
PLMNs, the MS should proceed as specified for case ii) below and use a
randomly selected random TLLI for the transmission of the ATTACH REQUEST
message.

For all other cases, the MS shall determine the TLLI as follows:

For an MS not supporting S1 mode, two cases can be distinguished:

\- a valid P-TMSI is available in the MS; or

\- no valid P-TMSI is available in the MS.

i\) valid P-TMSI available

If the MS has stored a valid P-TMSI, the MS shall derive a foreign TLLI
from that P-TMSI and shall use it for transmission of the:

\- ATTACH REQUEST message of any GPRS combined/non-combined attach
procedure; other GMM messages sent during this procedure shall be
transmitted using the same foreign TLLI until the ATTACH ACCEPT message
or the ATTACH REJECT message is received; and

\- ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message of a combined/non-combined RAU
procedure if the MS has entered a new routing area, or if the GPRS
update status is not equal to GU1 UPDATED. Other GMM messages sent
during this procedure shall be transmitted using the same foreign TLLI,
until the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REJECT message is received.

After a successful GPRS attach or routing area update procedure,
independent of whether a new P-TMSI is assigned, if the MS has stored a
valid P-TMSI then the MS shall derive a local TLLI from the stored
P-TMSI and shall use it for addressing at lower layers.

NOTE 1: Although the MS derives a local TLLI for addressing at lower
layers, the network should not assume that it will receive only LLC
frames using a local TLLI. Immediately after the successful GPRS attach
or routing area update procedure, the network must be prepared to
continue accepting LLC frames from the MS still using the foreign TLLI.

ii\) no valid P-TMSI available

When the MS has not stored a valid P-TMSI, i.e. the MS is not attached
to GPRS, the MS shall use a randomly selected random TLLI for
transmission of the:

\- ATTACH REQUEST message of any combined/non-combined GPRS attach
procedure.

The same randomly selected random TLLI value shall be used for all
message retransmission attempts and for the cell updates within one
attach attempt.

Upon receipt of an ATTACH REQUEST message, the network shall assign a
P-TMSI to the MS. The network derives a local TLLI from the assigned
P-TMSI, and transmits the assigned P-TMSI to the MS.

Upon receipt of the assigned P-TMSI, the MS shall derive the local TLLI
from this P-TMSI and shall use it for addressing at lower layers.

NOTE 2: Although the MS derives a local TLLI for addressing at lower
layers, the network should not assume that it will receive only LLC
frames using a local TLLI. Immediately after the successful GPRS attach,
the network must be prepared to continue accepting LLC frames from the
MS still using the random TLLI.

In both cases the MS shall acknowledge the reception of the assigned
P-TMSI to the network. After receipt of the acknowledgement, the network
shall use the local TLLI for addressing at lower layers.

For an MS supporting S1 mode, the following five cases can be
distinguished:

a\) the TIN indicates \"P-TMSI\" or \"RAT‑related TMSI\" and the MS holds
a valid P-TMSI and a RAI;

b\) the TIN indicates \"GUTI\" and the MS holds a valid GUTI;

c\) the TIN is deleted and the MS holds a valid P-TMSI and RAI;

d\) the TIN is deleted and the MS holds a valid GUTI, but no valid P-TMSI
and RAI; or

e\) none of the previous cases is fulfilled.

In case a) the MS shall derive a foreign TLLI from the P-TMSI and
proceed as specified for case i) above.

In case b), the MS shall derive a P-TMSI from the GUTI and then a
foreign TLLI from this P-TMSI and proceed as specified for case i)
above.

NOTE 3: The mapping of the GUTI to the P-TMSI is specified in
3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\].

In case c) the MS shall derive a foreign TLLI from the P-TMSI and
proceed as specified for case i) above.

In case d) the MS shall derive a P-TMSI from the GUTI and then a foreign
TLLI from this P-TMSI and proceed as specified for case i) above.

In case e) the MS shall proceed as as specified for case ii) above.

For transmission of an ATTACH REQUEST message, or a ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message after a routing area change, the MS also provides the
lower layers with the DCN-ID according to the following rules:

a\) if a DCN-ID for the PLMN code of the selected PLMN is available in
the MS, the MS shall provide this DCN-ID to the lower layers; or

b\) if no DCN-ID for the PLMN code of the selected PLMN is available but
a Default\_DCN\_ID value is available in the MS, as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], the MS shall provide the Default\_DCN\_ID value
to the lower layers.

#### 4.7.1.5 P-TMSI handling

##### 4.7.1.5.1 P-TMSI handling in A/Gb mode

If a new P-TMSI is assigned by the network the MS and the network shall
handle the old and the new P-TMSI as follows:

Upon receipt of a GMM message containing a new P-TMSI the MS shall
consider the new P-TMSI and new RAI and also the old P-TMSI and old RAI
as valid in order to react to paging requests and downlink transmission
of LLC frames. For uplink transmission of LLC frames the new P-TMSI
shall be used.

NOTE: For the case of multiple consecutive P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND
messages, the old P-TMSI is the latest P-TMSI included by the network in
a previous message different from the multiple consecutive P-TMSI
REALLOCATION COMMAND messages.

The MS shall consider the old P-TMSI and old RAI as invalid as soon as
an LLC frame is received with the local TLLI derived from the new
P-TMSI.

Upon the transmission of a GMM message containing a new P-TMSI the
network shall consider the new P-TMSI and new RAI and also the old
P-TMSI and old RAI as valid in order to be able to receive LLC frames
from the MS.

The network shall consider the old P-TMSI and old RAI as invalid as soon
as an LLC frame is received with the local TLLI derived from the new
P-TMSI.

##### 4.7.1.5.2 P-TMSI handling in Iu mode

If a new P-TMSI is assigned by the network the MS and the network shall
handle the old and the new P-TMSI as follows:

Upon receipt of a GMM message containing a new P-TMSI the MS shall
consider the new P-TMSI and new RAI as valid. Old P-TMSI and old RAI are
regarded as invalid.

The network shall consider the old P-TMSI and old RAI as invalid as soon
as an acknowledge message (e.g. ATTACH COMPLETE, ROUTING AREA UPDATE
COMPLETE and P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE) is received.

##### 4.7.1.5.3 Void

##### 4.7.1.5.4 Void

#### 4.7.1.6 Change of network mode of operation

In the following tables below the abbreviations \'A/Gb mode I\' and
\'A/Gb mode II\' are used for network operation mode I and II in A/Gb
mode.

In the following tables below the abbreviations \'Iu mode I\' and \'Iu
mode II\' are used for network operation modes I and II in Iu mode.

##### 4.7.1.6.1 Change of network mode of operation in A/Gb mode (A/Gb mode only)

Whenever an MS moves to a new RA, the procedures executed by the MS
depend on the network mode of operation in the old and new routing area.

In case the MS is in state GMM REGISTERED or GMM ROUTING AREA UPDATING
INITIATED and is in operation mode A or B, the MS shall execute
according to table 4.7.1.6.1-1:

Table 4.7.1.6.1-1/3GPP TS 24.008: Mode A or B

  ------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Network operation mode change   Procedure to execute

  I → II (\*\*\*)                 Normal Location Update(\*),\
                                  followed by a Normal Routing Area Update

  II → I                          Combined Routing Area Update with IMSI attach(\*\*)
  ------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------

(\*) Intended to remove the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*) Intended to establish the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*\*) If the MS that needs only GPRS services and \"SMS-only
service\" moves to a new routing area, see subclause 4.1.1.2.2.

Further details are implementation issues.

##### 4.7.1.6.2 Change of network mode of operation in Iu mode (Iu mode only)

Whenever an MS moves to a new RA, the procedures executed by the MS
depend on the network mode of operation in the old and new routing area.

In case the MS is in state GMM-REGISTERED or
GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATING-INITIATED and is in operation mode A, the MS
shall execute:

Table 4.7.1.6.4/3GPP TS 24.008: Mode A

  ------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Network operation mode change   Procedure to execute

  I → II (\*\*\*)                 Normal Location Update(\*),\
                                  followed by a Normal Routing Area Update

  II → I                          Combined Routing Area Update with IMSI attach(\*\*)
  ------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------

(\*) Intended to remove the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*) Intended to establish the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*\*) If the MS that needs only GPRS services and \"SMS-only
service\" moves to a new routing area, see subclause 4.1.1.2.2.

Further details are implementation issues.

##### 4.7.1.6.3 Change of network mode of operation at Iu mode to A/Gb mode inter-system change

Whenever an MS moves to a new RA supporting the A/Gb mode radio
interface, the procedures executed by the MS depend on the network mode
of operation in the old and new routing area.

In case the MS is in state GMM-REGISTERED or
GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATING-INITIATED and is in operation mode:

a\) A in Iu mode, an MS that changes to GPRS operation mode A or B in
A/Gb mode shall execute:

Table 4.7.1.6.5/3GPP TS 24.008: Mode A in Iu mode changing to GPRS mode
A or B in A/Gb mode

  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Network operation mode change       Procedure to execute

  Iu mode I → A/Gb mode I             Combined Routing Area Update

  Iu mode II → A/Gb mode I            Combined Routing Area Update with IMSI attach(\*\*)

  Iu mode I → A/Gb mode II (\*\*\*)   Normal Location Update(\*),\
                                      followed by a Normal Routing Area Update
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------

b\) C in Iu mode, the MS shall change to GPRS operation mode C in A/Gb
mode and shall execute the normal Routing Area Update procedure.

c\) CS in Iu mode, the MS shall execute the normal Location Update
procedure.

(\*) Intended to remove the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*) Intended to establish the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*\*) If the MS that needs only GPRS services and \"SMS-only
service\" moves to a new routing area, see subclause 4.1.1.2.2.

Further details are implementation issues.

##### 4.7.1.6.4 Change of network mode of operation at A/Gb mode to Iu mode inter-system change

Whenever an MS moves to a new RA supporting the Iu mode radio interface,
the procedures executed by the MS depend on the network mode of
operation in the old and new routing area.

In case the MS is in state GMM-REGISTERED or
GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATING-INITIATED and is in operation mode:

a\) A or B in A/Gb mode, the MS shall change to operation mode A in Iu
mode and shall execute:

Table 4.7.1.6.8/3GPP TS 24.008: Mode A or B in A/Gb mode changing to
mode A in Iu mode

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Network operation mode change     | Procedure to execute              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| A/Gb mode I → Iu mode I           | Combined Routing Area Update      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| A/Gb mode II → Iu mode I          | Combined Routing Area Update with |
|                                   | IMSI attach(\*\*)                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| A/Gb mode I → Iu mode II (\*\*\*) | Normal Location Update(\*),\      |
|                                   | followed by a Normal Routing Area |
|                                   | Update                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| A/Gb mode II → Iu mode II         | Normal Location Update if a new   |
| (\*\*\*)                          | LA is entered,                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | followed by a Normal Routing Area |
|                                   | Update                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

b\) C in A/Gb mode, an MS that changes to operation mode C in Iu mode
shall execute a Normal Routing Area Update.

(\*) Intended to remove the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*) Intended to establish the Gs association in the MSC/VLR.

(\*\*\*) If the MS that needs only GPRS services and \"SMS-only
service\" moves to a new routing area, see subclause 4.1.1.2.2.

Further details are implementation issues.

#### 4.7.1.7 Intersystem change between A/Gb mode and Iu mode

For the Iu mode to A/Gb mode and A/Gb mode to Iu mode intersystem change
the following cases can be distinguished:

a\) Intersystem change between cells belonging to different RA\'s:

The procedures executed by the MS depends on the network mode of
operation in the old and new RA. If a change of the network operation
mode has occurred in the new RA, then the MS shall behave as specified
in subclause 4.7.1.6. If no change of the network operation mode has
occurred in the new RA, then the MS shall initiate the normal or
combined routing area updating procedure depending on the network
operation mode in the current RA.

b\) Intersystem change between cells belonging to the same RA:

1\) If the READY timer is running in the MS in A/Gb mode before or after
the inter-system change occurs,or the MS is in PMM-CONNECTED mode in Iu
mode, before the inter-system change occurs then the MS shall perform a
normal or combined routing area updating procedure depending on the
network mode of operation in the current RA.

2\) If the READY timer is not running in the MS in A/Gb mode before the
inter-system change occurs, or the MS is in PMM-IDLE mode in Iu mode
before the inter-system change and the READY timer is not running in the
MS in A/Gb mode after the intersystem change, then, unless a routing
area updating procedure is required according to case c) or case b) 3)
below or according to subclause 4.7.5.1 and 4.7.5.2.1, the MS shall not
perform a routing area updating procedure until uplink user data or
signalling information needs to be sent from the MS to the network.

\- If the MS is in the same access network(i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu mode),
as when it last sent user data or signalling messages, the procedures
defined for that access system shall be followed. This shall be sending
of an LLC PDU in an A/Gb mode cell or initiating the service request
procedure in an Iu mode cell.

\- If the MS is in a different access network (i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu
mode), as when it last sent user data or signalling messages, the normal
or combined routing area updating procedure shall be performed depending
on the network operation mode in the current RA, before the sending of
user data or signalling messages. If the signalling message is a DETACH
REQUEST indicating \"power off\", the routing area updating procedure
need not to be performed.

\- If the periodic routing area update timer expires the MS shall
initiate the periodic routing area updating procedure.

3\) If the READY timer is not running in the MS in A/Gb mode or the MS is
in PMM-IDLE mode in Iu mode, then the MS shall perform a normal or
combined routing area updating procedure depending on the network mode
of operation in the current RA if the MS is required to perform routing
area updating for IMS voice termination as specified in annex P.3.

4\) If the READY timer is not running in the network in A/Gb mode or the
network is in PMM-IDLE mode in Iu mode, then the network shall page the
MS if downlink user data or signalling information needs to be sent from
the network to the MS. This shall include both A/Gb mode and Iu mode
cells.

\- If the MS receives the paging indication in the same access network
(i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu mode), as when it last sent user data or
signalling information, the MS shall send any LLC PDU in a A/Gb mode
cell or shall initiate the service request procedure indicating service
type \"paging response\" in an Iu mode cell.

\- If the MS receives the paging indication in a different access
network (i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu mode), as when it last sent user data or
signalling information, the MS shall perform a normal or combined
routing area updating procedure depending on the network operation mode
in the current RA.

c\) Intersystem handover from A/Gb mode to Iu mode during a CS
connection:

After the successful completion of the handover from an A/Gb mode cell
to an Iu mode cell, an MS which has performed the GPRS suspension
procedure in Gb mode (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]) (i.e. an MS in MS
operation mode B or an DTM MS in a A/Gb mode cell that does not support
DTM) shall perform a normal routing area updating procedure in the Iu
mode cell in order to resume the GPRS services in the network, before
sending any other signalling messages or user data.

#### 4.7.1.7a Intersystem change from S1 mode to A/Gb mode or S1 mode to Iu mode with ISR activated

If ISR is activated and the MS returns from S1 mode to a cell belonging
to a RA which is different from the RA where the MS is registered, the
MS initiates a normal or combined routing area updating procedure
depending on the network operation mode in the current RA.

If ISR is activated and the MS returns from S1 mode to a cell belonging
to the RA where the MS is registered, the following cases can be
distinguished:

a\) Inter-system change due to PS handover:

If the PS handover is to A/Gb mode, the MS initiates a normal or
combined routing area updating procedure depending on the network
operation mode in the current RA.

b\) Inter-system change not due to PS handover:

1\) If the READY timer is running in the MS after the inters-ystem change
occurs, then the MS shall perform a normal or combined routing area
updating procedure depending on the network mode of operation in the
current RA.

2\) If the READY timer is not running in the MS in A/Gb mode or the MS is
in PMM-IDLE mode in Iu mode after the intersystem change occurs, unless
a routing area updating procedure is required according to
subclause 4.7.5.1 and 4.7.5.2.1, the MS shall not perform a routing area
updating procedure until uplink user data or signalling information
needs to be sent from the MS to the network.

\- If the MS is in the same access network, (i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu mode),
as when it last sent user data or signalling messages in a cell
belonging to the RA where the MS is registered, the procedures defined
for that access system shall be followed. This shall be sending of an
LLC PDU in a A/Gb mode cell or initiating the SERVICE REQUEST procedure
in an Iu mode cell.

\- If the MS is in a different access network (i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu
mode), as when it last sent user data or signalling messages in a cell
belonging to the RA where the MS is registered, the normal or combined
RA update procedure shall be performed depending on the network
operation mode in the current RA, before the sending of user data or
signalling messages. If the signalling message is a DETACH REQUEST
indicating \"power off\", the routing area updating procedure need not
be performed.

\- If the periodic routing area update timer expires the MS shall
initiate the periodic RA update procedure.

3\) If the READY timer is not running in the network in A/Gb mode or the
network is in PMM-IDLE mode in Iu mode, then the network shall page the
MS if downlink user data or signalling information needs to be sent from
the network to the MS. This shall include both A/Gb mode and Iu mode
cells.

\- If the MS receives the paging indication in the same access network
(i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu mode), as when it last sent user data or
signalling information in a cell belonging to the RA where the MS is
registered, the MS shall send any LLC PDU in a A/Gb mode cell or shall
initiate the service request procedure indicating service type \"paging
response\" in an Iu mode cell.

\- If the MS receives the paging indication in a different access
network (i.e. A/Gb mode or Iu mode), as when it last sent user data or
signalling information in a cell belonging to the RA where the MS is
registered, the MS shall perform normal or combined routing area
updating procedure shall be performed depending on the network operation
mode in the current RA.

#### 4.7.1.7b Intersystem change from S1 mode to A/Gb mode or S1 mode to Iu mode for eCall only MS capable of eCall over IMS

If an eCall only MS (as determined by information configured in USIM)
capable of eCall over IMS returns from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode, the
MS shall:

a\) if timer T3444 is running, start timer T3242 with the time left on
timer T3444, and stop timer T3444;

b\) if timer T3445 is running, start timer T3243 with the time left on
timer T3445, and stop timer T3445;

c\) if the MS is attached for GPRS services only and timer T3444 or timer
T3445 is running:

\- perform a combined routing area updating procedure with IMSI attach
if the network operates in network operation mode I; and

\- perform a routing area updating procedure and a location area
updating procedure if the network operates in network operation mode II;
and

d\) if the MS is attached for both GPRS services and non-GPRS services
and timer T3444 or timer T3445 is running:

\- perform a combined routing area updating procedure if the network
operates in network operation mode I; and

\- perform a routing area updating procedure and a location are updating
procedure if the network operates in network operation mode II.

NOTE: Timers T3444 and T3445 are specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\].

#### 4.7.1.7c Return to packet idle mode for eCall only MS capable of eCall over IMS

If an eCall only MS (as determined by information configured in USIM)
capable of eCall over IMS returns to packet idle mode following the
release of a call to an HPLMN designated non-emergency MSISDN or URI for
test or terminal reconfiguration service which was handed over from S1
mode and timer T3243 is not running, the MS shall start timer T3243.

#### 4.7.1.8 List of forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service

The Mobile Equipment shall contain a list of \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\". This lists shall be erased when the MS is switched off or
when the SIM/USIM is removed or upon the expiry of the timer T3245 as
described in subclause 4.1.1.6. The PLMN identification received on the
BCCH shall be added to the list whenever a GPRS attach or routing area
update is rejected by the network with the cause \"GPRS services not
allowed in this PLMN\" or whenever a GPRS detach is initiated by the
network with the cause \"GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN\".

In a shared network, the MS shall choose one of the PLMN identities as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]. The PLMN identity selected for a
GPRS attach procedure, or the PLMN identity used to construct the RAI
that triggered the routing area updating procedure shall be added to the
list of \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\" whenever such a procedure
is rejected by the network with the cause \"GPRS services not allowed in
this PLMN\". Whenever a GPRS detach is initiated by the network with the
cause \"GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN\", the PLMN identity that
was selected for GPRS attach procedure or routing area update procedure
shall be added to the list of \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\".

The maximum number of possible entries in this list is implementation
dependent, but must be at least one entry. When the list is full and a
new entry has to be inserted, the oldest entry shall be deleted.

#### 4.7.1.8a Establishment of the PS signalling connection (Iu mode only)

In order to route the NAS message to an appropriate SGSN, the MS NAS
provides the lower layers with the routing parameter according to the
following rules:

a\) if the TIN indicates \"P-TMSI\" or \"RAT-related TMSI\", and the MS
holds a valid P-TMSI, the MS NAS shall provide the lower layers with the
P-TMSI;

b\) if the TIN indicates \"GUTI\" and the MS holds a valid GUTI, the MS
NAS shall provide the lower layers with the P-TMSI mapped from the GUTI
(see 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]);

c\) if the TIN is not available and the MS holds a valid P-TMSI, the MS
NAS shall provide the lower layers with the P-TMSI; or

d\) if the TIN is not available and the MS holds a valid GUTI, but no
valid P-TMSI, the MS NAS shall provide the lower layers with the P-TMSI
mapped from the GUTI (see 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]).

When an ATTACH REQUEST message, or a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
after a routing area change, is sent to establish a PS signalling
connection, the MS NAS also provides the lower layers with the DCN-ID
according to the following rules:

a\) if a DCN-ID for the PLMN code of the selected PLMN is available in
the MS, this DCN-ID the MS NAS shall provide this DCN-ID to the lower
layers; or

b\) if no DCN-ID for the PLMN code of the selected PLMN is available but
a Default\_DCN\_ID value is available in the MS, as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], the Default\_DCN\_ID value MS NAS shall provide
the Default\_DCN\_ID value to the lower layers.

#### 4.7.1.9 Release of the PS signalling connection (Iu mode only)

In Iu mode, to allow the network to release the PS signalling connection
(see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]) the MS:

a\) shall start the timer T3340 if the MS receives any of the reject
cause values \#11, \#12, \#13, \#15 or \#25;

b\) shall start the timer T3340 if the network indicates \"no follow-on
proceed\" in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT or ATTACH ACCEPT message and
user plane radio access bearers have not been setup;

c\) shall start the timer T3340 if the MS receives a DETACH ACCEPT
message and the MS has set the detach type to \"IMSI detach\" in the
DETACH REQUEST message and user plane radio access bearers have not been
set up; or

d\) may start the timer T3340 if the MS receives any of the reject cause
values \#3, \#6, \#7 or \#8 or if it receives an AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING REJECT message.

Upon expiry of T3340, the MS shall release the established PS signalling
connection (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

Upon release of the established PS signalling connection, if timer T3243
is not running, the MS shall start timer T3243 when:

\- the MS is an eCall only MS (as determined by information configured
in USIM);

\- the MS is capable of eCall over IMS; and

\- the PS signalling connection that was released had been established
for a call to an HPLMN designated non-emergency MSISDN or URI for test
or terminal reconfiguration service which was handed over from S1 mode.

In case b, if the MS has signalling pending, then it shall request a new
PS signalling connection for further signalling.

In case b and c,

\- upon an indication from the lower layers that radio accesss bearer(s)
is set up, the MS shall stop timer T3340 and may send uplink signalling
via the existing PS signalling connection or user data via radio access
bearer(s). If the MS is establishing a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services or the MS is initiating a service request procedure to
send user data for emergency bearer services, the MS shall send the
uplink signalling via the existing PS signalling connection;

\- upon receipt of a REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message, MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message, DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, REQUEST
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message or REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT
ACTIVATION message, the MS shall stop timer T3340 and may send uplink
signalling via the existing PS signalling connection. If the MS is
establishing a PDN connection for emergency bearer services or the MS is
initiating a service request procedure to send user data for emergency
bearer services, the MS shall send the uplink signalling via the
existing PS signalling connection; or

\- upon receipt of a DETACH REQUEST message, the MS shall stop timer
T3340 and respond to the network initiated GPRS detach as specified in
subclause 4.7.4.2.

If the MS receives the \"Extended wait time\" for PS domain from the
lower layers when no attach, routing area updating or service request
procedure is ongoing, the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

If the MS needs to perform PLMN selection, the MS may release the
established PS signalling connection (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

#### 4.7.1.10 Handling of 3GPP PS data off

An MS, which supports 3GPP PS data off (see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]), can
be configured with up to two lists of 3GPP PS data off exempt services
as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in the EF~3GPPPSDATAOFF~ USIM
file as specified in 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]:

\- a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the HPLMN or
EHPLMN; and

\- a list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the VPLMN.

If only the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the
HPLMN or EHPLMN is configured at the MS, this list shall be also used in
the VPLMN.

If the MS supports 3GPP PS data off, the MS shall provide the 3GPP PS
data off UE status in the protocol configuration options IE during PDP
context activation procedure (see subclause 6.1.3.1).

The network informs the MS about the support of 3GPP PS data off during
PDP context activation procedure as specified in subclause 6.1.3.1. If
3GPP data off support is not indicated in the protocol configuration
options IE in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the MS shall not
indicate any change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for the PDN connection
established by the PDP context activation procedure; otherwise the MS
shall indicate change of the 3GPP PS data off UE status for the PDN
connection by using the PDP context modification procedure as specified
in subclause 6.1.3.3. If the network does not provide indication of
support of 3GPP PS data off during PDP context activation procedure, the
MS behaviour for non-exempt service requests from the network is
implementation dependent.

When the 3GPP PS data off UE status is \"activated\":

a\) the MS does not send uplink IP packets except:

\- for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt
services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] when the MS is in its HPLMN or EHPLMN;

\- for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt
services to be used in the HPLMN or EHPLMN when the MS is in the VPLMN,
if only the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the
HPLMN or EHPLMN is configured to the MS as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\];

\- for those services indicated in the list of 3GPP PS data off exempt
services to be used in the VPLMN when the MS is in the VPLMN, if the
list of 3GPP PS data off exempt services to be used in the VPLMN is
configured to the MS as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\];

\- for those services indicated in the EF~3GPPPSDATAOFF~ USIM file as
specified in 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]; and

\- any uplink traffic due to procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\]; and

b\) the MS does not send uplink non-IP user data packets.

Otherwise the MS sends uplink user data packets without restriction.

NOTE: If the MS supports 3GPP PS data off, uplink IP packets are
filtered as specified in 3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] in subclause B.3.1.5.

### 4.7.2 GPRS Mobility management timers and UMTS PS signalling connection control

#### 4.7.2.1 READY timer behaviour

##### 4.7.2.1.1 READY timer behaviour (A/Gb mode only)

The READY timer, T3314 is used in the MS and in the network per each
assigned P-TMSI to control the cell updating procedure.

When the READY timer is running or has been deactivated the MS shall
perform cell update each time a new cell is selected (see
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\]). If a routing area border is crossed, a routing
area updating procedure shall be performed instead of a cell update.

When the READY timer has expired:

\- the MS shall perform the routing area updating procedure when a
routing area border is crossed;

\- the MS shall not perform a cell update when a new cell is selected.

\- the network shall page the MS if down-link user data or signalling
information needs to be sent to the MS.

All other GMM procedures are not affected by the READY timer.

The READY timer is started:

\- in the MS when the GMM entity receives an indication from lower
layers that an LLC frame other than LLC NULL frame has been transmitted
on the radio interface; and

\- in the network when the GMM entity receives an indication from lower
layers that an LLC frame other than LLC NULL frame has been successfully
received by the network.

Within GMM signalling procedures the network includes a \"force to
standby\" information element, in order to indicate whether or not the
READY timer shall be stopped when returning to the GMM-REGISTERED state.
If the \"force to standby\" information element is received within more
than one message during a ongoing GMM specific procedure, the last one
received shall apply. If the READY timer is deactivated and the network
indicates \"force to standby\" with the \"force to standby\" information
element, this shall not cause a modification of the READY timer.

The READY timer is not affected by state transitions to and from the
GMM-REGISTERED.SUSPENDED sub-state.

The value of the READY timer may be negotiated between the MS and the
network using the GPRS attach or GPRS routing area updating procedure.

\- If the MS wishes to indicate its preference for a READY timer value
it shall include the preferred values into the ATTACH REQUEST and/or
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST messages. The preferred values may be
smaller, equal to or greater than the default values or may be equal to
the value requesting the READY Timer function to be deactivated.

\- Regardless of whether or not a timer value has been received by the
network in the ATTACH REQUEST or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST messages,
the network may include a timer value for the READY timer (different or
not from the default value) into the ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT messages, respectively. If the READY Timer value was
included, it shall be applied for the GMM context by the network and by
the MS.

\- When the MS proposes a READY Timer value and the Network does not
include any READY Timer Value in its answer, then the value proposed by
the MS shall be applied for the GMM context by the Network and by the
MS.

\- When neither the MS nor the Network proposes a READY Timer value into
the ATTACH REQUEST/ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST/ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, then the default value shall be used.

If the negotiated READY timer value indicates that the ready timer
function is deactivated, the READY timer shall always run without
expiry. If the negotiated READY timer value indicates that the ready
timer function is deactivated, and within the same procedure the network
indicates \"force to standby\" with the \"force to standby\" information
element, the READY timer shall always run without expiry. If the
negotiated READY timer value is set to zero, the READY timer shall be
stopped immediately.

To account for the LLC frame uplink transmission delay, the READY timer
value should be slightly shorter in the network than in the MS. This is
a network implementation issue.

If a new READY timer value is negotiated, the MS shall upon the
reception of the ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message
perform an initial cell update (either by transmitting a LLC frame or,
if required, a ATTACH COMPLETE or ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message),
in order to apply the new READY timer value immediately. If both the
network and the MS support the Cell Notification, the initial cell
update shall use any LLC frame except the LLC NULL frame. If the new
READY timer value is set to zero or if the network indicates \"force to
standby\" with the \"force to standby\" IE, the initial cell update
should not be done.

##### 4.7.2.1.2 Handling of READY timer in the MS in Iu mode and S1 mode

The READY timer is not applicable for Iu mode in S1 mode.

Upon completion of a successful GPRS attach or routing area updating
procedure in Iu mode, the MS shall stop the READY timer, if running.

Upon completion of a successful EPS attach or tracking area updating
procedure, the MS shall stop the READY timer, if running.

In Iu mode, an MS may indicate a READY timer value to the network in the
ATTACH REQUEST and the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST messages.

If a READY timer value is received by an MS capable of both Iu mode and
A/Gb mode in the ATTACH ACCEPT or the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message, then the MS shall store the received value in order to use it
at an intersystem change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode.

##### 4.7.2.1.2a Handling of READY timer in the network in Iu mode and S1 mode

The READY timer is not applicable for Iu mode in S1 mode.

Upon completion of a successful GPRS attach or routing area updating
procedure, the network shall stop the READY timer, if running.

When the SGSN is informed by the HLR/HSS that the MS performed an EPS
attach or by the MME that the UE is performing a tracking area updating
procedure, the SGSN shall stop the READY timer, if running.

#### 4.7.2.2 Periodic routing area updating

The periodic routing area updating procedure is used to periodically
notify the availability of the MS to the network. The procedure is
controlled in the MS by timer T3312. The value of timer T3312 is sent by
the network to the MS in the messages ATTACH ACCEPT and ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT. The value of timer T3312 shall be unique within a RA.

If the value of timer T3312 received by the MS in A/Gb mode or received
in Iu mode in a message with integrity protection contains an indication
that the timer is deactivated or the timer value is zero, then timer
T3312 is deactivated and the MS shall not perform the periodic routing
area updating procedure.

In Iu mode, if the value of timer T3312 is received in a message without
integrity protection and the indicated value is larger than the last
received value, or the indicated value is \"deactivated\" or zero, the
MS shall use the last received value. If there is no last received
value, then the MS shall use the default value.

In A/Gb mode, the timer T3312 is reset and started with its initial
value, when the READY timer is stopped or expires. Timer T3312 is
stopped and shall be set to its initial value for the next start when
the READY timer is started. If after a READY timer negotiation the READY
timer value is set to zero, timer T3312 is reset and started with its
initial value. If the initial READY timer value is zero, the timer T3312
is reset and started with its initial value, when the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message is transmitted.

In Iu mode, timer T3312 is reset and started with its initial value,
when the MS changes from PMM-CONNECTED to PMM-IDLE mode. Timer T3312 is
stopped when the MS enters PMM-CONNECTED mode.

If the MS is attached for emergency bearer services, when timer T3312
expires, the MS shall not initiate a periodic routing area updating
procedure, but shall locally detach from the network. When the MS is
camping on a suitable cell, it may re-attach to regain normal service.

If the MS is not attached for emergency bearer services, when timer
T3312 expires, the periodic routing area updating procedure shall be
started and timer T3312 shall be set to its initial value for the next
start.

If the MS is in a state other than GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE when
timer T3312 expires, the periodic routing area updating procedure is
delayed until the MS returns to GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS in MS operation mode B is in the state
GMM-REGISTERED.SUSPENDED when timer T3312 expires the periodic routing
area updating procedure is delayed until the state is left.

If ISR is activated, the MS shall keep both timer T3412 and timer T3312.
The two separate timers run in the MS for updating the MME and the SGSN
independently. The MS shall start timer T3323 if timer T3312 expires,
and timer T3346 is running or the MS is in one of the following states:

\- GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE;

\- GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH;

\- GMM-REGISTERED.UPDATE-NEEDED; or

\- GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall initiate the routing area updating procedure and stop
timer T3323 when the MS enters the state GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE
before timer T3323 expires. After expiry of timer T3323 the MS shall
deactivate ISR by setting its TIN to \"GUTI\".

If timer T3323 expires, the MS shall memorize that it has to initiate a
routing area updating procedure when it returns to state
GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE.

The network supervises the periodic routing area updating procedure by
means of the mobile reachable timer.

If the MS is not attached for emergency bearer services, the mobile
reachable timer shall be longer than timer T3312. In this case, by
default, the mobile reachable timer is 4 minutes greater than timer
T3312.

NOTE 1: According to subclause 4.7.5.1.5, if a periodic routing area
updating procedure fails repeatedly, it can take more than 7 minutes
before the MS starts using MM specific procedures.

The network may include timer T3312 extended value IE in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message only if the MS
indicates support of the timer T3312 extended value in the MS network
feature support IE.

If the network includes the timer T3312 extended value IE in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the network shall
use the timer T3312 extended value IE as the value of timer T3312.

If ISR is not activated, when the mobile reachable timer expires,
typically the network stops sending paging messages to the mobile and
may take other appropriate actions.

If the MS is attached for emergency bearer services, the SGSN shall set
the mobile reachable timer with a value equal to timer T3312. When the
mobile reachable timer expires, the SGSN shall locally detach the MS.

In A/Gb mode, the mobile reachable timer is reset and started with the
value as indicated above, when the READY timer is stopped or expires.
The mobile reachable timer is stopped when the READY timer is started.

In A/Gb mode, if after a READY timer negotiation the READY timer value
is set to zero, the mobile reachable timer is reset and started with its
initial value. If the initial READY timer value is zero, the mobile
reachable timer is reset and started with its initial value, when the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message is received.

In Iu mode, the mobile reachable timer is reset and started with the
value as indicated above, when the MS changes from PMM-CONNECTED to
PMM-IDLE mode. The mobile reachable timer is stopped when the MS enters
PMM-CONNECTED mode.

If ISR is activated, upon expiry of the mobile reachable timer the
network shall start the implicit detach timer. By default, the implicit
detach timer is 4 minutes greater than timer T3323. If the implicit
detach timer expires before the MS contacts the network, the network
shall implicitly detach the MS and deactivate ISR.

If ISR is not activated, upon expiry of the mobile reachable timer the
network may start the implicit detach timer. The value of the implicit
detach timer is network dependent. If the implicit detach timer expires
before the MS contacts the network, the network shall implicitly detach
the MS.

If the network includes the T3324 value IE in the ATTACH ACCEPT message
or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message and if the MS is not attached for
emergency bearer services and has no PDN connection for emergency bearer
services, the network shall set the active timer to a value equal to the
value of timer T3324.

If the MS has established a PDN connection for emergency bearer services
after receiving the timer T3324 value IE in the ATTACH ACCEPT message or
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the active timer shall not be
started.

When the active timer expires, typically the network stops sending
paging messages to the mobile and may take other appropriate actions.

In A/Gb mode, the active timer is reset and started with the value as
indicated above, when the READY timer is stopped or expires. The active
timer is stopped when the READY timer is started.

In Iu mode, the active timer is reset and started with the value as
indicated above, when the MS changes from PMM-CONNECTED to PMM-IDLE
mode. The active timer is stopped when the MS enters PMM-CONNECTED mode.

NOTE 2: ISR is not activated when the network includes the T3324 value
IE in the ATTACH ACCEPT message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

If the SGSN includes timer T3346 in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT
message or the SERVICE REJECT message and timer T3346 is greater than
timer T3312, the SGSN sets the mobile reachable timer and the implicit
detach timer such that the sum of the timer values is greater than timer
T3346.

NOTE 3: According to subclause 4.7.5.1.5, if a periodic routing area
updating procedure fails repeatedly, it can take more than 7 minutes
before the MS starts using MM specific procedures.

If the MS is both IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services, and if
the MS lost coverage of the registered PLMN and timer T3312 expires or
timer T3323 expires, then:

a\) if the MS returns to coverage in a cell that supports GPRS and that
indicates that the network is in network operation mode I, then the MS
shall either perform the combined routing area update procedure
indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\"; or

b\) if the MS returns to coverage in a cell in the same RA that supports
GPRS and that indicates that the network is in network operation mode
II, then the MS shall perform the periodic routing area updating
procedure indicating \"Periodic updating\"; or

c\) if the MS was both IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services in
network operation mode I and the MS returns to coverage in a cell in the
same LA that does not support GPRS, then the MS shall perform the
periodic location updating procedure. In addition, the MS shall perform
a combined routing area update procedure indicating \"combined RA/LA
updating with IMSI attach\" when the MS enters a cell that supports GPRS
and that indicates that the network is in network operation mode I; or

d\) if the MS returns to coverage in a new RA, the description given in
subclause 4.7.5 applies.

If this subclause specifies that the MS shall perform a periodic routing
area updating procedure, but subclause 4.7.5 specifies the MS shall
perform a normal or combined routing area updating procedure, the
description in subclause 4.7.5 takes precedence.

If the MS is both IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services in a
network that operates in network operation mode I, and if the MS has
camped on a cell that does not support GPRS, and timer T3312 expires or
timer T3323 expires, then the MS shall start an MM location updating
procedure. In addition, the MS shall perform a combined routing area
update procedure indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\"
when the MS enters a cell that supports GPRS and indicates that the
network is in operation mode I.

If timer T3312 expires or timer T3323 expires during an ongoing CS
connection, then a MS operating in MS operation mode B shall treat the
expiry of T3312 when the MM state MM-IDLE is entered, analogous to the
descriptions for the cases when the timer expires out of coverage or in
a cell that does not support GPRS.

In A/Gb mode, timer T3312 and timer T3323 shall not be stopped when a
GPRS MS enters state GMM-REGISTERED.SUSPENDED.

#### 4.7.2.3 PMM-IDLE mode and PMM-CONNECTED mode (Iu mode only)

An MS shall enter PMM-CONNECTED mode when a PS signalling connection for
packet switched domain is established between the MS and the network.
The MS shall not perform periodic routing area update in PMM-CONNECTED
mode.

An MS shall enter PMM-IDLE mode when the PS signalling connection for
packet switched domain between the MS and the network has been released.
The MS shall perform periodic routing area update in PMM-IDLE mode.

#### 4.7.2.4 Handling of *Force to standby* in Iu mode (Iu mode only)

Force to standby is not applicable for Iu mode.

The network shall always indicate *Force to standby not indicated* in
the *Force to standby* information element.

The *Force to standby* information element shall be ignored by the MS.

#### 4.7.2.5 RA Update procedure for Signalling Connection Re-establishment (Iu mode only)

When the MS receives an indication from the lower layers that the RRC
connection has been released with cause \"Directed signalling connection
re-establishment\", see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118
\[111\], then the MS shall enter PMM-IDLE mode and initiate immediately
a normal routing area update procedure (the use of normal or combined
procedure depends on the network operation mode in the current serving
cell) regardless whether the routing area has been changed since the
last update or not. This routing area update procedure shall also be
performed or continued if the MS has performed an inter-system change
towards GSM, irrespective whether the READY timer is running or the MS
is in PMM-IDLE or PMM-CONNECTED mode.

#### 4.7.2.6 Cell Update triggered by low layers

A Cell Update may be requested by the low layers, see
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\]. In this case the Cell Update shall be performed
even if the READY timer is not running. If both the network and the MS
support the Cell Notification, then the MS shall use the LLC NULL frame
to perform the Cell Update.

#### 4.7.2.7 Handling of timer T3302

The value of timer T3302 can be sent by the network to the MS in the
ATTACH ACCEPT message, ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, ATTACH REJECT
message, and ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message. The MS shall apply this
value, if the value is different from \"deactivated\" in the routing
area registered by the MS, until a new value is received. The default
value of this timer is used in the following cases:

\- ATTACH ACCEPT message, ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, ATTACH
REJECT message, or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is received
without a value specified;

\- In Iu mode, if the network provides a value in a non-integrity
protected Iu mode GMM message and the MS is not attaching for emergency
services or not attached for emergency services;

\- In A/Gb mode and if the MS supports integrity protection, if the
network provides a value in a non-integrity protected GMM message;

\- the network indicates that the timer is \"deactivated\";

\- the MS does not have a stored value for this timer;

\- a new PLMN which is not in the list of equivalent PLMNs has been
entered, the routing area updating fails and the routing area updating
attempt counter is equal to 5; or

\- a new PLMN which is not in the list of equivalent PLMNs has been
entered, the attach procedure fails, and the attach attempt counter is
equal to 5.

#### 4.7.2.8 Handling of timer T3324 (A/Gb mode, Iu mode and S1 mode)

An MS supporting PSM may request the network to assign a value for T3324
by including a requested timer value in:

\- the ATTACH REQUEST or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message (in A/Gb
mode and Iu mode ); or

\- the ATTACH REQUEST or TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message (in S1
mode).

The value of timer T3324 can be sent by the network to the MS in:

\- the ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message (in A/Gb mode
and Iu mode ); and

\- the ATTACH ACCEPT or TRACKING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message (in S1
mode).

NOTE: Besides the value requested by the MS, the network can take local
configuration into account when selecting a value for T3324 (see
3GPP TS 23.682 \[133A\], subclause 4.5.4).

In A/Gb mode and Iu mode, the MS shall apply the received T3324 value in
the RA identified by the RAI contained in the ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, until a new value is received, T3324 is
deactivated or a new PLMN is selected. The timer T3324 is deactivated
if:

\- the last attach or routing area updating attempt was not completed
successfully;

\- the network does not include a value for timer T3324 in the last
ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message received by the MS;
or

\- the indicated value of the timer is \"deactivated\".

In A/Gb mode and Iu mode, timer T3324 is reset and started with its
initial value, when the MS changes from PMM-CONNECTED mode to PMM-IDLE
mode (in Iu mode) or when the READY timer is stopped or expires (in A/Gb
mode). Timer T3324 is stopped when the MS enters PMM-CONNECTED mode or
GMM-DEREGISTERED state or the READY timer is started.

In S1 mode, the MS shall apply the received T3324 value in all tracking
areas of the list of tracking areas assigned to the MS, until a new
value is received, T3324 is deactivated or a new PLMN is selected. The
timer T3324 is deactivated if:

\- the last attach or tracking area updating attempt was not completed
successfully;

\- the network does not include a value for timer T3324 in the last
ATTACH ACCEPT or TRACKING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message received by the MS;
or

\- the indicated value of the timer is \"deactivated\".

In S1 mode, timer T3324 is reset and started with its initial value,
when the MS changes from EMM-CONNECTED mode to EMM-IDLE mode. Timer
T3324 is stopped when the MS enters EMM-CONNECTED mode or
EMM-DEREGISTERED state.In A/Gb mode and Iu mode, when timer T3324
expires the MS may activate PSM as specified in subclause 4.7.2.9.

In S1 mode, when timer T3324 expires the MS may activate PSM as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], subclause 5.3.11.

In A/Gb mode and Iu mode, if timer T3324 expires during an ongoing CS
connection, the MS shall take action on the expiry of timer T3324 as
described in subclause 4.7.2.9 when the MM state MM-IDLE is entered.

#### 4.7.2.9 Power saving mode

The MS can request the use of power saving mode (PSM) during an attach
or routing area updating procedures (see 3GPP TS 23.682 \[133A\] and
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]). The MS shall not request the use of PSM during:

\- an attach for emergency bearer services procedure;

\- a routing area updating procedure for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services; or

\- a routing area updating procedure when the MS has a PDN connection
established for emergency bearer services.

The network accepts the use of PSM by providing a specific value for
timer T3324 when accepting the attach or routing area updating
procedure. The MS may use PSM only if the network has provided the T3324
value IE during the last attach or routing area updating procedure with
a value different from \"deactivated\".

Upon expiry of the timer T3324 or if the T3324 value provided by the
network is zero, the MS may deactivate the AS layer and activate PSM by
entering the state GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE if:

a\) the MS is not attached for emergency bearer services;

b\) the MS has no PDN connection for emergency bearer services;

c\) the MS is in PMM-IDLE mode (in Iu mode) or the READY timer is not
running (in A/Gb mode);

d\) the MS is in the GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE state; and

e\) no RR connection exists.

If conditions a, b, c and e are fulfilled, but the MS is in a state
other than GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE when timer T3324 expires, the
MS may activate PSM when the MS returns to state
GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE.

If conditions a, b, c and d are fulfilled, but an RR connection exists,
the MS may activate PSM when the RR connection has been released.

An MS that has already been allocated timer T3324 with a value different
from \"deactivated\" and the timer T3324 has expired, may activate PSM
if it receives an \"Extended wait time\" from lower layers.

When PSM is activated all NAS timers are stopped and associated
procedures aborted except for timers T3312, T3346, T3396, any backoff
timers, and the timer T controlling the periodic search for HPLMN or
EHPLMN or higher prioritized PLMNs (see 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]).

If the MS is attached for emergency bearer services or has a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services, the MS shall not activate PSM.

The MS may deactivate PSM at any time (e.g. for transfer of mobile
originated signalling or user data, or to initiate a mobile originated
circuit-switched transaction), by activating the AS layer before
initiating the necessary GMM or MM procedures (if any).

#### 4.7.2.10 Extended idle-mode DRX cycle

The MS can request the use of extended idle mode DRX cycle (eDRX) during
an attach or routing area updating procedure by including the extended
DRX parameters IE (see 3GPP TS 23.682 \[11A\] and
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]). The MS shall not request the use of eDRX during:

\- an attach for emergency bearer services procedure; or

\- a routing area updating procedure for the MS attached for emergency
bearer services.

The MS and the network may negotiate eDRX parameters during a routing
area updating procedure when the MS has a PDP context for emergency
bearer services.

The network accepts the request to use eDRX by providing the extended
DRX parameters IE when accepting the attach or the routing area updating
procedure. The MS shall use extended idle mode DRX cycle only if it
received the extended DRX parameters IE during the last attach or
routing area updating procedure and the MS does not have a PDP context
for emergency bearer services.

NOTE: If the MS wants to keep using eDRX, the MS includes the extended
DRX parameters IE in each attach or routing area updating procedure.

If the MS received the extended DRX parameters IE during the last attach
or routing area updating procedure, upon the successful completion of
the PDP context deactivation procedure for a PDP context for emergency
bearer services, the MS shall resume eDRX.

If the network has provided the extended DRX parameters IE during the
last attach or routing area updating procedure, upon the successful
completion of the PDP context deactivation procedure for a PDP context
for emergency bearer services, the network shall resume eDRX.

If the MS or the network locally deactivates the PDP context for
emergency bearer service, the MS or the network shall not use eDRX until
the MS receives eDRX parameters during a routing area updating procedure
with PDP context synchronization or upon successful completion of a
service request procedure.

If the MS did not receive the extended DRX parameters IE, or if the MS
has a PDP context for emergency bearer services, the MS shall use the
stored DRX parameters, if available.

If the network did not accept the request to use eDRX, or if the MS has
a PDP context for emergency bearer services, the network shall use the
stored DRX parameters, if available.

#### 4.7.2.11 Interaction between power saving mode and extended idle mode DRX cycle

The MS can request the use of both PSM and eDRX during an attach or
routing area update procedure but it is up to the network to decide to
enable none, one of them or both (see 3GPP TS 23.682 \[133A\] and
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

If the network accepts the use of both PSM (see subclause 4.7.1.9) and
eDRX (see subclause 4.7.2.10), the extended DRX parameters IE provided
to the MS should allow for multiple paging occasions before the active
timer expires.

#### 4.7.2.12 Extended coverage for GSM

The MS can support and use the extended coverage in GSM for IoT
(EC-GSM-IoT) feature (see 3GPP TS 43.064 \[159\]). A GPRS MS using
EC-GSM-IoT may operate in MS operation mode C only. If the MS uses one
of the four coverage classes of EC-GSM-IoT as defined in
3GPP TS 43.064 \[159\], the MS shall calculate the value of the
applicable NAS timers as indicated in tables 11.3, 11.3A and 11.2c using
a multiplier of 3, unless the timer is deactivated. The NAS timer value
obtained is used as described in the appropriate procedure subclause of
this specification. The NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of
a NAS procedure and shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure
is completed, restarted or aborted.

The usage of one of the four coverage classes of EC-GSM-IoT by an MS is
indicated to the SGSN by lower layers. When a SGSN that supports
EC-GSM-IoT performs NAS signaling with an MS that is using EC-GSM-IoT,
the SGSN shall calculate the value of the applicable NAS timers as
indicated in tables 11.4, 11.4a and 11.2d using a multiplier of 3. The
NAS timer value shall be calculated at start of a NAS procedure and
shall not be re-calculated until the NAS procedure is completed,
restarted or aborted.

In order to deal with use of extensive resources from the network, the
operator may prevent specific subscribers from using enhanced coverage
(see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]). When in A/Gb mode, the MS supporting
EC-GSM-IoT shall indicate support for restriction on use of enhanced
coverage. The MS supporting restriction on use of enhanced coverage
indicates \"Mobile station supports restriction on use of enhanced
coverage\" in the MS network capability information element in the
ATTACH REQUEST and ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. If the MS
supports restriction on use of enhanced coverage, the SGSN indicates
whether the use of enhanced coverage is restricted or not in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message and ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message (see
subclause 4.7.3.1 and subclause 4.7.5.1). If the use of enhanced
coverage is restricted the MS shall not use enhanced coverage in the
registered PLMN and in any PLMN which is in the list of equivalent
PLMNs.

### 4.7.3 GPRS attach procedure

The GPRS attach procedure is used for the following purposes:

\- normal GPRS attach, performed by the MS to IMSI attach for GPRS
services only. The normal GPRS attach procedure shall be used:

\- by GPRS MSs in MS operation mode C, independent of the network
operation mode;

\- by GPRS MSs in MS operation modes A or B if the network operates in
network operation mode II; and

\- by GPRS MSs in MS operation mode A, independent of the network
operation mode, if a circuit-switched transaction is ongoing;

\- combined GPRS attach procedure, used by GPRS MSs in MS operation
modes A or B to attach the IMSI for GPRS and non-GPRS services provided
that the network operates in network operation mode I.

\- GPRS attach for emergency bearer services, performed by the MS to
IMSI or IMEI attach to emergency bearer services.

The lower layers indicate to NAS that the network does not support
emergency bearer services for the MS in limited service state (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]). This information is taken into account when
deciding whether to initiate attach for emergency bearer services.

With a successful GPRS attach procedure a GMM context is established.

When the timer T3346 is running, MS is allowed to initiate an attach
procedure if:

\- the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN;

\- the MS is attaching for emergency bearer services; or

\- the MS has timer T3346 running because a request from an MS with the
low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" was rejected, and the MS needs to attach without the low
priority indicator, or with the low priority indicator set to \"MS is
not configured for NAS signalling low priority\".

An eCall only mobile station that is not capable of eCall over IMS shall
not perform a normal or combined GPRS attach procedure.

An eCall only mobile station that is capable of eCall over IMS may
perform a normal or combined GPRS attach procedure only upon failure of
a routing area updating procedure following intersystem change from S1
mode to A/Gb or Iu mode.

When the MS moves from NG-RAN coverage to GERAN coverage, or from NG-RAN
coverage to UTRAN coverage, the MS shall perform a normal or combined
GPRS attach procedure, if the following applies:

\- the MS initiated a registration procedure while in N1 mode; and

\- since then the MS did not perform a successful EPS attach or tracking
area updating procedure in S1 mode or GPRS attach or routing area
updating procedure in A/Gb mode or Iu mode.

Subclause 4.7.3.1 describes the GPRS attach procedure to attach the IMSI
only for GPRS services. The combined GPRS attach procedure used to
attach the IMSI for both GPRS and non-GPRS services is described in
subclause 4.7.3.2. GPRS attach for emergency bearer services is
described as part of subclause 4.7.3.1.

If an IMSI attach for non-GPRS services is requested and a GMM context
exists, the routing area updating procedure shall be used as described
in subclause 4.7.5.2.

To limit the number of consecutive rejected attach attempts, a GPRS
attach attempt counter is introduced. The GPRS attach attempt counter
shall be incremented as specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.5. Depending on
the value of the GPRS attach attempt counter, specific actions shall be
performed. The GPRS attach attempt counter shall be reset when:

\- the MS is powered on;

\- a SIM/USIM is inserted;

\- a GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure is successfully
completed;

\- an attach or combined attach procedure is successfully completed in
S1 mode;

\- a combined GPRS attach procedure is completed for GPRS services only
with cause \#2, \#16, \#17, \#22 or \#28;

\- a GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure is rejected with
cause \#11, \#12, \#13, \#14 ,\#15 or \#25;

\- a network initiated detach procedure is completed with cause \#11,
\#12, \#13, \#14, \#15 or \#25; or

\- a new PLMN is selected;

and additionally when the MS is in substate ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH:

\- expiry of timer T3302;

\- a new routing area is entered;

\- an attach is triggered by CM sublayer requests;

\- timer T3346 is started.

The mobile equipment shall contain a list of \"forbidden location areas
for roaming\", as well as a list of \"forbidden location areas for
regional provision of service\". The handling of these lists is
described in subclause 4.4.1; the same lists are used by GMM and MM
procedures.

In a shared network, the MS shall choose one of the PLMN identities as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]. The MS shall construct the Routing
Area Identification of the cell from this chosen PLMN identity, and the
LAC and the RAC received on the BCCH. For:

\- a shared GERAN, in A/Gb mode, the chosen PLMN identity is indicated
to the GERAN in the first RLC data block of an upper layer PDU (see
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\]) when a foreign TLLI or a random TLLI is used by
the network sharing supporting MS for the transmission.

\- a shared UTRAN, the chosen PLMN identity shall be indicated to the
UTRAN in the RRC INITIAL DIRECT TRANSFER message (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

For GERAN Iu mode, network sharing is not supported.

Whenever an ATTACH REJECT message with the cause \"PLMN not allowed\" is
received by the MS, the chosen PLMN indentity shall be stored in the
\"forbidden PLMN list\" and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245
(see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6.
Whenever an ATTACH REJECT message is received by the MS with the cause
\"Roaming not allowed in this location area\", \"Location Area not
allowed\", or \"No suitable cells in Location Area\", the LAI that is
part of the constructed RAI shall be stored in the suitable list.

The network informs the MS about the support of specific features, such
as LCS-MOLR, MBMS, IMS voice over PS session, emergency bearer services
in Iu mode in the Network feature supporti nformation element. The
information is either explicitly given by sending the Network feature
support IE or implicitly by not sending it. The handling in the network
is described in subclause 9.4.2.9. The network can also use the
Additional network feature support IE in order to inform the MS about
the support of specific features such as the delivery of SMS via GPRS
(GPRS-SMS) or implicitly by not sending it. The MS may use the support
indications for LCS-MOLR, MBMS and GPRS-SMS to inform the user about the
availability of the appropriate services. The MS shall not request the
LCS-MOLR or MBMS services, if the service has not been indicated as
available. The indication for MBMS is defined in subclause \"MBMS
feature support indication\" in 3GPP TS 23.246 \[106\]. In an MS with
IMS voice over PS capability, the IMS voice over PS session indicator
and the emergency bearer services indicator shall be provided to the
upper layers. The upper layers take the IMS voice over PS session
indicator into account as specified in 3GPP TS 23.221 \[131\],
subclause 7.2a and subclause 7.2b, when selecting the access domain for
voice sessions or calls in Iu mode. When initiating an emergency call in
Iu mode, the upper layers also take the emergency bearer services
indicator into account for the access domain selection. The MS may use
the GPRS-SMS indication in order to obtain SMS.

#### 4.7.3.1 GPRS attach procedure for GPRS services

The GPRS attach procedure is a GMM procedure used by GPRS MSs to IMSI
attach for GPRS services. The procedure is also used by GPRS MSs to IMSI
or IMEI attach for emergency bearer services.

The attach type information element shall indicate \"GPRS attach\". For
an MS attaching for emergency bearer services the attach type
information element shall indicate \"Emergency attach\".

##### 4.7.3.1.1 GPRS attach procedure initiation

In state GMM-DEREGISTERED, the MS initiates the GPRS attach procedure by
sending an ATTACH REQUEST message to the network, starts timer T3310 and
enters state GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED. If timer T3302 is currently
running, the MS shall stop timer T3302. If timer T3311 is currently
running, the MS shall stop timer T3311.

If the MS is configured for \"AttachWithIMSI\" as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\] and the selected PLMN
is neither the registered PLMN nor in the list of equivalent PLMNs, the
MS shall include the IMSI in the Mobile identity IE in the ATTACH
REQUEST message.

For all other cases:

If the MS does not support S1 mode:

\- the MS capable of both Iu mode and A/Gb mode or only of A/Gb mode
shall include a valid P-TMSI, if any is available, the P-TMSI signature
associated with the P-TMSI and the routing area identity associated with
the P-TMSI in the ATTACH REQUEST message. In addition, the MS shall
include P-TMSI type IE with P-TMSI type set to \"native P-TMSI\". If
there is no valid P-TMSI available, the IMSI shall be included instead
of the P-TMSI and P-TMSI signature.

If the MS supports S1 mode:

\- if the TIN indicates \"GUTI\" and the MS holds a valid GUTI, the MS
shall map the GUTI into the Mobile identity IE, P‑TMSI signature IE and
Old routing area identification IE. The MS shall also include P-TMSI
type IE with P-TMSI type set to \"mapped P-TMSI\". Additionally, if the
MS holds a valid P-TMSI and RAI, the MS shall indicate the P-TMSI in the
Additional mobile identity IE and the RAI in the Additional old routing
area identification IE.

NOTE: The mapping of the GUTI to the P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and RAI is
specified in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\].

\- If the TIN indicates \"P-TMSI\" or \"RAT‑related TMSI\" and the MS
holds a valid P-TMSI and a RAI, the MS shall indicate the P-TMSI in the
Mobile identity IE and the RAI in the Old routing area identification
IE. The MS shall also include P-TMSI type IE with P-TMSI type set to
\"native P-TMSI\". If a P-TMSI signature is associated with the P-TMSI,
the MS shall include it in the Old P-TMSI signature IE.

\- If the TIN is deleted and

\- the MS holds a valid P-TMSI and a RAI, the MS shall indicate the
P-TMSI in the Mobile identity IE and the RAI in the Old routing area
identification IE. The MS shall also include P-TMSI type IE with P-TMSI
type set to \"native P-TMSI\". If a P-TMSI signature is associated with
the P-TMSI, the MS shall include it in the Old P-TMSI signature IE; or

\- the MS does not hold a valid P-TMSI and RAI, but holds a valid GUTI,
the MS shall map the GUTI into the Mobile identity IE, P‑TMSI signature
IE and Old routing area identification IE. The MS shall also include
P-TMSI type IE with P-TMSI type set to \"mapped P-TMSI\"; or

\- the MS does not hold a valid P-TMSI, RAI or GUTI, the MS shall
include the IMSI in the Mobile identity IE.

\- Otherwise the MS shall include the IMSI in the Mobile identity IE.

In the cases when the MS maps a GUTI into the Mobile identity IE, P‑TMSI
signature IE and Old routing area identification IE, then:

\- If a current EPS security exists, the P-TMSI signature shall include
a truncated NAS token as specified in 3GPP TS 33.401 \[123\]. In the
GPRS ciphering key sequence number IE, the MS shall indicate the value
of the eKSI associated with the current EPS security context. The MS
shall derive CK\' and IK\' from the K~ASME~ and the NAS uplink COUNT
value corresponding to the NAS token derived and handle the START value
as specified in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]. Then, the MS shall store the
mapped UMTS security context replacing the established UMTS security
context for the PS domain.

\- If a current EPS security does not exist, the MS shall set the
truncated NAS token included in the P-TMSI signature to all zeros and
the GPRS ciphering key sequence number to \"No key is available\".

If the MS is attaching for emergency bearer services and does not hold a
valid GUTI, P-TMSI or IMSI as described above, the IMEI shall be
included in the Mobile identity IE.

The MS shall also indicate within the DRX parameters whether it supports
the split pg cycle option on CCCH. The optional support of the split pg
cycle on CCCH by the network is indicated in SI13 or PSI1. Split pg
cycle on CCCH is applied by both the network and the MS when the split
pg cycle option is supported by both (see 3GPP TS 45.002 \[32\]).

If the MS supports eDRX and requests the use of eDRX, the MS shall
include the extended DRX parameters IE in the ATTACH REQUEST message.

In Iu mode, if the MS wishes to prolong the established PS signalling
connection after the GPRS attach procedure (for example, the MS has any
CM application request pending), it may set a follow-on request pending
indicator on (see subclause 4.7.13).

An MS attaching for emergency bearer services shall set the follow-on
request pending indicator.

If the MS supports PSM and requests the use of PSM, then the MS shall
include the T3324 value IE with a requested timer value in the ATTACH
REQUEST message. When the MS includes the T3324 value IE and the MS
indicates support for extended periodic timer value in the MS network
feature support IE, it may also include the T3312 extended value IE to
request a particular T3312 value to be allocated.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS supports the restriction on use of enhanced
coverage, then the MS shall set the Restriction on use of enhanced
coverage capability bit to \"Mobile station supports restriction of use
of enhanced coverage\" in the MS network capability IE of the ATTACH
REQUEST message.

If the MS supports dual connectivity of E-UTRA with New Radio (NR), then
the MS shall set the Dual connectivity of E-UTRA with NR capability bit
to \"Mobile station supports dual connectivity of E-UTRA with NR\" in
the MS network capability IE of the ATTACH REQUEST message.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available and if the MS
indicates support of integrity protection in the MS network capability
IE included in the ATTACH REQUEST message, then the MS shall derive a
GPRS GSM Kint key as described in subclause 4.7.7.3b and a GPRS GSM
Kc~128~ key as described in subclause 4.7.7.3a. The MS shall then assign
the GPRS GSM Kint key, the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ key, the GPRS GSM integrity
algorithm and the GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm (identified by the
information in the Ciphering Algorithm IE and Integrity Algorithm IE
stored in the non-volatile ME memory) to the LLC layer, and indicate to
the LLC layer that it shall start integrity protection. This shall be
done so that the LLC layer can integrity protect, but not cipher, the
ATTACH REQUEST message. The MS shall include the CKSN in the CKSN IE in
the ATTACH REQUEST message. If the MS has no UMTS security context
available, then the MS shall not integrity protect the ATTACH REQUEST
message in the LLC layer. In this case the MS shall set the CKSN IE to
the value \"no key is available\" and send the ATTACH REQUEST
unprotected.

##### 4.7.3.1.2 GMM common procedure initiation

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message containing the P-TMSI
type IE and the Mobile identity IE with type of identity indicating
\"TMSI/P-TMSI/M-TMSI\", and the network does not follow the use of the
most significant bit of the LAC as specified in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]
subclause 2.8.2.2.2, the network shall use the P-TMSI type IE to
determine whether the mobile identity included in the Mobile identity IE
is a native P‑TMSI or a mapped P‑TMSI.

The network may initiate GMM common procedures, e.g. the GMM
identification and GMM authentication and ciphering procedure, depending
on the received information such as IMSI, CKSN, old RAI, P-TMSI and
P-TMSI signature.

##### 4.7.3.1.3 GPRS attach accepted by the network

During an attach for emergency bearer services, if not restricted by
local regulations, the network shall not check for mobility and access
restrictions, regional restrictions, subscription restrictions, or
perform CSG access control when processing the ATTACH REQUEST message.
The network shall not apply subscribed APN based congestion control
during an attach procedure for emergency bearer services.

If the GPRS attach request is accepted by the network, an ATTACH ACCEPT
message is sent to the MS.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the
MS network capability IE in the ATTACH REQUEST message, and if the
network supports integrity protection, then the network shall store all
octets received from the MS in the MS network capability IE and in the
MS Radio Access Capability IE, up to the maximum length defined for the
respective information element.

NOTE 1: The network needs to store the MS network capability IE and the
MS Radio Access Capability IE exactly as received from the MS and
network is not allowed to ignore the \"higher\" octets sent by the MS
even if the network does not support any features indicated in the
higher octets. Otherwise the replay check of the MS network capability
and the MS Radio Access Capability will fail in the MS.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available in the network and
if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the ATTACH
REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection, and if
integrity protection of the ATTACH REQUEST message is successfully
verified in the LLC layer in the network, then if the network decides to
re-authenticate the MS or select a new integrity algorithm or ciphering
algorithm, the network shall initiate an authentication and ciphering
procedure.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available in the network and
if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the ATTACH
REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection if
integrity protection of the ATTACH REQUEST message is successfully
verified in the LLC layer in the network , the network may decide to
continue using the stored: GPRS GSM Kint integrity key, the GPRS GSM
Kc~128~ ciphering key, the GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm and the GPRS GSM
integrity algorithm in the LLC layer without initiating an
authentication and ciphering procedure. If the MS and network continue
to use the same ciphering mode as when the MS was previously attached to
the network, ciphering or no ciphering, the ciphering mode is
re-established without the need to run an authentication and ciphering
procedure. The network shall replay the MS network capability IE and the
MS radio access capability IE received from the MS in the ATTACH REQUEST
message, by including the MS network capability IE and the MS radio
access capability IE in the ATTACH ACCEPT message to the MS. The GMM
layer in the network shall assign the stored GPRS GSM Kint key, the GPRS
GSM Kc~128~ key, the GPRS GSM integrity algorithm and the GPRS GSM
ciphering algorithm to the LLC layer. The GMM layer in the network shall
then indicate to the LLC layer that it shall start integrity protection
and ciphering in the LLC layer before sending the ATTACH ACCEPT message
to the MS. If the integrity protection of the ATTACH REQUEST message is
not successfully verified in the LLC layer or if the ATTACH REQUEST
message is received without integrity protection, then the network shall
progress the ATTACH REQUEST message and initiate an authentication and
ciphering procedure in order to authenticate the MS and activate
integrity protection and ciphering in the MS.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available in the network and
if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the ATTACH
REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection, and if
the network is not able to verify the message authentication code in the
LLC layer protecting the ATTACH REQUEST message, due to the LLC layer at
the network not having been configured yet with the integrity key and
integrity algorithm for this MS, then the network shall progress the
ATTACH REQUEST message at GMM layer anyway. If the CKSN included in the
ATTACH REQUEST message belongs to an UMTS security context available in
the network, then the network may re-establish integrity protection and
ciphering of layer 3 signalling messages in the LLC layer without
initiating an authentication and ciphering procedure.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS indicates support of integrity protection of
user plane data in the MS network capability IE in the ATTACH REQUEST
message, and if the network supports and accepts integrity protection of
user plane data, then the network shall indicate integrity protection of
user plane data to the MS in the ATTACH ACCEPT message. The MS shall
indicate to the LLC layer to start integrity protection of user plane
data after the reception of the ATTACH ACCEPT message. The same GPRS GSM
Kint key and the same GPRS GSM integrity algorithm used for integrity
protection of layer 3 signalling messages shall be used for integrity
protection of user plane data in the LLC layer. The network shall
indicate to the LLC layer to start integrity protection of user plane
data after sending off the ATTACH ACCEPT message to the MS. If the
network does not indicate to the MS in the ATTACH ACCEPT message that it
accepts the use of integrity protection of user plane, and if the MS
does not accept such a network, then the MS shall detach from the
network.

The P-TMSI reallocation may be part of the GPRS attach procedure. When
the ATTACH REQUEST includes the IMSI or IMEI, the SGSN shall allocate
the P-TMSI. The P-TMSI that shall be allocated is then included in the
ATTACH ACCEPT message together with the routing area identifier. The
network shall, in this case, change to state
GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED and shall start timer T3350 as described
in subclause 4.7.6. Furthermore, the network may assign a P-TMSI
signature for the GMM context which is then also included in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message. If the LAI or PLMN identity that has been transmitted in
the ATTACH ACCEPT message is a member of any of the \"forbidden\" lists,
any such entry shall be deleted. If the attach procedure is for
emergency bearer services, the \"forbidden\" lists shall remain
unchanged. Additionally, the network shall include the radio priority
level to be used by the MS for mobile originated SMS transfer in the
ATTACH ACCEPT message.

In a shared network, if the MS is a network sharing supporting MS, the
network shall indicate the PLMN identity of the CN operator that has
accepted the GPRS attach request in the RAI contained in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message; if the MS is a network sharing non-supporting MS, the
network shall indicate the PLMN identity of the common PLMN (see
3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]). If the PLMN identity of the common PLMN
included in the RAI does not identify the CN operator that has accepted
the GPRS attach request, the network may include the PLMN identity of
the CN operator that has accepted the GPRS attach request in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message.

In a multi-operator core network (MOCN) with common GERAN, the network
shall indicate in the RAI the common PLMN identity (see
3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]).

If the common PLMN identity included in the RAI does not identify the CN
operator that has accepted the GPRS attach request, the network may
include the PLMN identity of the CN operator that has accepted the GPRS
attach request in the ATTACH ACCEPT message.

If the MS has indicated in the ATTACH REQUEST message that it supports
PS inter-RAT handover from GERAN to UTRAN Iu mode, the network may
include in the ATTACH ACCEPT message a request to provide the Inter RAT
information container.

If the MS has included the MS network capability IE or the UE network
capability IE or both in the ATTACH REQUEST message, the network shall
store all octets received from the MS, up to the maximum length defined
for the respective information element.

NOTE 2: This information is forwarded to the new SGSN during inter-SGSN
handover or to the new MME during intersystem handover to S1 mode.

If the DRX parameter was included in the DRX Parameter IE in the ATTACH
REQUEST message, the network shall replace any stored DRX parameter with
the received parameter and use it for the downlink transfer of
signalling and user data.

The network shall include the extended DRX parameters IE in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message only if the extended DRX parameters IE was included in
the ATTACH REQUEST message, and the network supports and accepts the use
of eDRX.

In A/Gb mode, the Cell Notification information element shall be
included in the ATTACH ACCEPT message by the network which indicates
that the Cell Notification is supported by the network.

In Iu mode, the network should prolong the PS signalling connection if
the mobile station has indicated a follow-on request pending in ATTACH
REQUEST. The network may also prolong the PS signalling connection
without any indication from the mobile terminal.

The MS, receiving an ATTACH ACCEPT message, stores the received routing
area identification, stops timer T3310, resets the GPRS attach attempt
counter, resets the routing area updating attempt counter, resets the
service request attempt counter, enters state GMM-REGISTERED and sets
the GPRS update status to GU1 UPDATED.

If the message contains a P-TMSI, the MS shall use this P-TMSI as the
new temporary identity for GPRS services. In this case, an ATTACH
COMPLETE message is returned to the network. The MS shall delete its old
P-TMSI and shall store the new one. If no P-TMSI has been included by
the network in the ATTACH ACCEPT message, the old P-TMSI, if any
available, shall be kept.

If the message contains a P-TMSI signature, the MS shall use this P-TMSI
signature as the new temporary signature for the GMM context. The MS
shall delete its old P-TMSI signature, if any is available, and shall
store the new one. If the message contains no P-TMSI signature, the old
P-TMSI signature, if available, shall be deleted.

If the network supports delivery of SMS via GPRS (3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\])
and this delivery is enabled (see 3GPP TS 29.272 \[150\]), then the
network shall include the Additional network feature support IE in the
ATTACH ACCEPT message and set the GPRS-SMS indicator.

If the network supports the extended protocol configuration options IE
and the MS indicated support of the extended protocol configuration
options IE, then the network shall include the Additional network
feature support IE in the ATTACH ACCEPT message and set the ePCO IE
indicator to \"extended protocol configuration options IE supported\".

Upon receiving the ATTACH ACCEPT message an MS supporting S1 mode shall
set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\".

If the network has requested the provision of Inter RAT handover
information, the MS shall return an ATTACH COMPLETE message including
the Inter RAT handover information IE to the network.

The network may also send a list of \"equivalent PLMNs\" in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message. Each entry of the list contains a PLMN code (MCC+MNC).
The mobile station shall store the list, as provided by the network, and
if the GPRS attach procedure is not for emergency bearer services, any
PLMN code that is already in the \"forbidden PLMN\" list shall be
removed from the \"equivalent PLMNs\" list before it is stored by the
mobile station. If the mobile station is operating in MS operation mode
C or the mobile station is supporting S1 mode, it shall also remove any
PLMN code that is already in the list of \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" before storing the list. In addition the mobile station shall
add to the stored list the PLMN code of the registered PLMN that sent
the list. All PLMNs in the stored list shall be regarded as equivalent
to each other for PLMN selection, cell selection/re-selection and
handover. The stored list in the mobile station shall be replaced on
each occurrence of the ATTACH ACCEPT message. If no list is contained in
the message, then the stored list in the mobile station shall be
deleted. An MS attached for emergency bearer services shall delete the
stored list when the MS enters the state GMM-DEREGISTERED. The list
shall be stored in the mobile station while switched off so that it can
be used for PLMN selection after switch on.

The network shall include the T3324 value IE in the ATTACH ACCEPT
message only if the T3324 value IE was included in the ATTACH REQUEST
message, and the network supports and accepts the use of PSM.

If the network supports and accepts the use of PSM, and the MS included
the T3312 extended value IE in the ATTACH REQUEST message, then the
network shall take into account the T3312 value requested when providing
the Periodic RA update timer IE and the T3312 extended value IE in the
ATTACH ACCEPT message.

NOTE 3: Besides the value requested by the MS, the network can take
local configuration into account when selecting a value for T3312 (see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\] subclause 5.3.13.54).

In A/Gb mode, if the MS indicates support for restriction on use of
enhanced coverage in the ATTACH REQUEST message, and the network
restricts enhanced coverage for the MS, then the network shall set the
RestrictEC bit to \"Enhanced coverage restricted\" in the Additional
network feature support IE of the ATTACH ACCEPT message.

In Iu mode, if the network wishes to prolong the PS signalling
connection (for example, if the mobile station has indicated \"follow-on
request pending\" in ATTACH REQUEST message) the network shall indicate
the \"follow-on proceed\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT message. If the network
wishes to release the PS signalling connection, the network shall
indicate \"no follow-on proceed\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT message.

After that in Iu mode, the mobile station shall act according to the
follow-on proceed flag included in the Attach result information element
in the ATTACH ACCEPT message (see subclause 4.7.13).

In A/Gb mode, if the ATTACH ACCEPT message contains the Cell
Notification information element, then the MS shall start to use the LLC
NULL frame to perform cell updates. The network receiving an ATTACH
COMPLETE message stops timer T3350, changes to GMM-REGISTERED state and
considers the P-TMSI sent in the ATTACH ACCEPT message as valid.

If the ATTACH ACCEPT message contains the T3312 extended value IE, then
the MS shall use the value in T3312 extended value IE as periodic
routing area update timer (T3312). If the ATTACH ACCEPT message does not
contain T3312 extended value IE, then the MS shall use the value in the
Periodic RA update timer IE as periodic routing area update timer
(T3312).

If the ATTACH ACCEPT message contains the T3324 value IE, then the MS
shall use the included timer value for T3324 as specified in
subclause 4.7.2.8.

If the ATTACH ACCEPT message contains the DCN-ID IE, then the MS shall
store the included DCN-ID value together with the PLMN code of the
registered PLMN in a DCN-ID list in a non-volatile memory in the ME as
described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], annex C.

In a shared network or in a multi-operator core network (MOCN) with
common GERAN, if the ATTACH ACCEPT message contains the DCN-ID IE and
the PLMN identity of the CN operator IE, the MS shall store the included
DCN-ID value with the PLMN identity indicated in the PLMN identity of
the CN operator IE, and the included DCN-ID value with the PLMN identity
indicated in the RAI in a DCN-ID list in a non-volatile memory in the ME
as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], annex C.

If the MS receives the ATTACH ACCEPT message from a PLMN for which a
PLMN-specific attempt counter or PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter is
maintained (see subclause 4.1.1.6A), then the MS shall reset these
counters. If the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall reset this counter.

The network may also send a Local Emergency Numbers List with local
emergency numbers in the ATTACH ACCEPT, by including the Emergency
Number List IE. The mobile equipment shall store the Local Emergency
Numbers List, as provided by the network. The Local Emergency Numbers
List stored in the mobile equipment shall be replaced on each receipt of
the Emergency Number List IE. The received Local Emergency Numbers List
shall be provided to the upper layers.

The emergency number(s) received in the Emergency Number List IE are
valid only in networks in the same country as the cell on which this IE
is received. If no list is contained in the ATTACH ACCEPT message, then
the stored Local Emergency Numbers List in the mobile equipment shall be
kept, except if the mobile equipment has successfully registered to a
PLMN in a country different from that of the PLMN that sent the Local
Emergency Numbers List.

The mobile equipment shall use the stored Local Emergency Numbers List
of emergency numbers received from the network in addition to the
emergency numbers stored on the SIM/USIM or ME to detect that the number
dialled is an emergency number.

NOTE 4: The mobile equipment may use the Local Emergency Numbers List to
assist the end user in determining whether the dialled number is
intended for an emergency service or for another destination, e.g. a
local directory service. The possible interactions with the end user are
implementation specific.

NOTE 5: An MS that supports procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.302 \[156\], can get additional local emergency numbers
through those procedures, which can be used based on operator policy
(see 3GPP TS 24.302 \[156\]) to detect that the number dialled is an
emergency number.

The Local Emergency Numbers List shall be deleted at switch off and
removal of the SIM/USIM. The mobile equipment shall be able to store up
to ten local emergency numbers received from the network.

If the MS has initiated the attach procedure due to manual CSG selection
and receives an ATTACH ACCEPT message, and the MS sent the ATTACH
REQUEST message in a CSG cell, the MS shall check if the CSG ID and
associated PLMN identity of the cell are contained in the Allowed CSG
list. If not, the MS shall add that CSG ID and associated PLMN identity
to the Allowed CSG list and the MS may add the HNB Name (if provided by
lower layers) to the Allowed CSG list if the HNB Name is present in
neither the Operator CSG list nor the Allowed CSG list.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available, if the MS
indicates support of integrity protection in the ATTACH REQUEST message
and the network supports integrity protection, then if the MS receives
replayed capabilities IE's in ATTACH ACCEPT, then the MS shall check if
the replayed MS network capability IE and replayed MS Radio Access
Capability IE received in the ATTACH ACCEPT message has not been altered
compared to the MS network capability IE and the MS Radio Access
Capability IE that the MS sent to the network in ATTACH REQUEST message.
If the replayed MS network capability IE and the replayed MS Radio
Access Capability IE are not the same, then the MS shall ignore the
ATTACH ACCEPT message.

##### 4.7.3.1.4 GPRS attach not accepted by the network

If the attach request cannot be accepted by the network, an ATTACH
REJECT message is transferred to the MS. The MS receiving the ATTACH
REJECT message containing a reject cause other than GMM cause value \#25
or the message is integrity protected, shall stop the timer T3310 and
for all causes except \#7, \#12, \#14, \#15, \#22 and \#25 deletes the
list of \"equivalent PLMNs\".

If the ATTACH REJECT message containing GMM cause value cause \#25 was
received without integrity protection, then the MS shall discard the
message.

If the attach request is rejected due to NAS level mobility management
congestion control, the network shall set the GMM cause value to \#22
\"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3346.

The MS shall then take one of the following actions depending upon the
reject cause:

\# 3 (Illegal MS);

\# 6 (Illegal ME);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The new GMM state is GMM-DEREGISTERED. The SIM/USIM shall be considered
as invalid for GPRS services until switching off or the SIM/USIM is
removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If
the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers
and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall in addition set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall abort the RR
connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The SIM/USIM shall be
considered as invalid also for non-GPRS services until switching off or
the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been successfully integrity
checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

\# 7 (GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The new state is
GMM-DEREGISTERED. If the message has been successfully integrity checked
by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM
considered invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this
counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE 1: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

\# 8 (GPRS services and non-GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The new GMM state is GMM-DEREGISTERED.

NOTE 2: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall
delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is
operating in MS operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS
shall abort the RR connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The
SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS and non-GPRS services
until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services\", then
the MS shall set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum
value. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the
lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to
MS implementation-specific maximum value.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

\# 11 (PLMN not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status
to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to
subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter and
shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and
if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\]
or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall start timer T3245 and
proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when attach procedure is rejected
with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 12 (Location area not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for regional provision of service\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a cell selection according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 3: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach procedure is
rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 13 (Roaming not allowed in this location area);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE or optionally to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach procedure is
rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 14 (GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status
to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to
subclause 4.1.3.2) , shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter and
shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" list and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. A GPRS
MS operating in MS operation mode C shall perform a PLMN selection
instead of a cell selection. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a
PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode II, is still IMSI attached for CS services in the network.

As an implementation option, a GPRS MS operating in operation mode A or
B may perform the following additional action. If no RR connection
exists the MS may perform the action immediately. If the MS is operating
in MS operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS may only
perform the action when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- The MS may perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If an MS in GAN mode performs a PLMN selection, it shall request a PLMN
list in GAN (see 3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN
selection from this list according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

The MS shall not perform the optional PLMN selection in the case where
the PLMN providing this reject cause is:

\- On the \"User Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology\" list;

\- On the \"Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology\"
list;

\- On the \"PLMN Selector\" list for an MS using a SIM/USIM without
access technology information storage (i.e. the \"User Controlled PLMN
Selector with Access Technology\" and the \"Operator Controlled PLMN
Selector with Access Technology\" data files are not present); or

\- A PLMN identified as equivalent to any PLMN, within the same country,
contained in the lists above.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach procedure is
rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 15 (No Suitable Cells In Location Area);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED(and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or a
tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

NOTE 4: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach procedure is
rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 22 (Congestion);

If the T3346 value IE is present in the ATTACH REJECT message and the
value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall be considered as an
abnormal case and the behaviour of the MS for this case is specified in
subclause 4.7.3.1.5.

The MS shall abort the attach procedure, reset the GPRS attach attempt
counter, set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED and enter state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH.

The MS shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

If the ATTACH REJECT message is integrity protected, the MS shall start
timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

If the ATTACH REJECT message is not integrity protected, the MS shall
start timer T3346 with a random value from the default range specified
in table 11.3a.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process. The attach procedure is started if still needed
when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and attach attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach
procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 25 (Not authorized for this CSG);

Cause \#25 is only applicable in UTRAN Iu mode and when received from a
CSG cell. Other cases are considered as abnormal cases and the
specification of the mobile station behaviour is given in
subclause 4.7.3.1.5.

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), reset the GPRS attach
attempt counter and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ATTACH REQUEST message are contained in the Allowed CSG list
stored in the MS, the MS shall remove the entry corresponding to this
CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the Allowed CSG list.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ATTACH REQUEST message are contained in the Operator CSG list
stored in the MS, the MS shall proceed as specified in
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach procedure is
rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The specification of the
MS behaviour in those cases is specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.5.

##### 4.7.3.1.4a GPRS attach for emergency bearer services not accepted by the network (UTRAN Iu mode only)

If the attach request for emergency bearer services cannot be accepted
by the network, an ATTACH REJECT message is transferred to the MS. The
ATTACH REJECT message includes GMM cause \#5 \"IMEI not accepted\" or
one of the GMM cause values as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.4.

NOTE 1: If GMM cause \#11 is sent to a MS of a roaming subscriber
attaching for emergency bearer services and the MS is in automatic
network selection mode, it cannot obtain normal service provided by this
PLMN.

Upon receiving the ATTACH REJECT message including GMM cause \#5, the MS
shall enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.NO-IMSI.

Upon receiving the ATTACH REJECT message including one of the other GMM
cause values, the MS shall perform the actions as described in
subclause 4.7.3.1.4 with the following addition: the MS shall inform the
upper layers of the failure of the procedure.

NOTE 2: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain), or
other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] can result in the emergency call being attempted
to another IP-CAN.

If the attach request for emergency bearer services fails due to
abnormal case a) in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, the MS shall perform the
actions as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.5 and inform the upper layers
of the failure to access the network.

NOTE 3: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain), or
other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] can result in the emergency call being attempted
to another IP-CAN.

If the attach request for emergency bearer services fails due to
abnormal cases b), c) or d) in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, the MS shall perform
the actions as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.5 with the following
addition: the MS shall inform the upper layers of the failure of the
procedure.

NOTE 4: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain), or
other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] can result in the emergency call being attempted
to another IP-CAN.

In a shared network, upon receiving the ATTACH REJECT message, the MS
shall perform the actions as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.4, and
shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 5: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain), or
other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] can result in the emergency call being attempted
to another IP-CAN.

b\) attempt the attach for emergency bearer services to another PLMN in
the shared network.

In a shared network, if the attach request for emergency bearer services
fails due to abnormal case a) in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, the MS shall
perform the actions as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.5 and shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure to access the network; or

NOTE 6: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain), or
other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] can result in the emergency call being attempted
to another IP-CAN.

b\) attempt the attach for emergency bearer services to another PLMN in
the shared network.

In a shared network, if the attach request for emergency bearer services
fails due to abnormal cases b), c) or d) in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, the MS
shall perform the actions as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, and
shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 7: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain), or
other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[13D\] can result in the emergency call being attempted
to another IP-CAN.

b\) attempt the attach for emergency bearer services to another PLMN in
the shared network.

##### 4.7.3.1.4b Attach for initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services not accepted by the network (UTRAN Iu mode only)

If the network cannot accept the attach request for initiating a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services with attach type not set to
\"emergency attach\", the MS shall perform the procedures as described
in subclause 4.7.3.1.4. Then if the MS is in the same selected PLMN
where the last attach request was attempted, the MS shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 1: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

b\) attempt GPRS attach for emergency bearer services.

If the attach request for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services with attach type not set to \"emergency attach\" fails
due to abnormal case a) in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, the MS shall perform the
procedures as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.5 and inform the upper
layers of the failure to access the network.

NOTE 2: This can result in the MS attempting a CS emergency call (if not
already attempted in the CS domain) or other implementation specific
mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can
result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the attach request for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services with attach type not set to \"emergency attach\" fails
due to abnormal cases b), c) or d) in subclause 4.7.3.1.5, the MS shall
perform the procedures as described in subclause 4.7.3.1.5. Then if the
MS is in the same selected PLMN where the last attach request was
attempted, the MS shall:

a\) inform the upper layers; or

NOTE 3: This can result in the MS attempting a CS emergency call (if not
already attempted in the CS domain) or other implementation specific
mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in 3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can
result in the emergency call being attempted to another IP-CAN.

b\) attempt GPRS attach for emergency bearer services.

##### 4.7.3.1.5 Abnormal cases in the MS

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Access barred because of access class control, EAB or ACDC

The GPRS attach procedure shall not be started. The MS stays in the
current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process. The
GPRS attach procedure is started as soon as possible, i.e. when access
is granted or because of a cell change.

If access is barred because of access class control, ACDC is applicable
to the request from the upper layers and the MS supports ACDC, then the
GPRS attach procedure shall be started.

If access is barred for a certain ACDC category, a request with a higher
ACDC category is received from the upper layers and the MS supports
ACDC, then the GPRS attach procedure shall be started.

If an access request for an uncategorized application is barred due to
ACDC, a request with a certain ACDC category is received from the upper
layers and the MS supports ACDC, then the GPRS attach procedure shall be
started.

b\) Lower layer failure without \"Extended Wait Time\" received from
lower layers before the ATTACH ACCEPT or ATTACH REJECT message is
received

The procedure shall be aborted and the MS shall proceed as described
below, except in the following implementation option cases b.1 and b.2.

b.1) Release of PS signalling connection in Iu mode before the
completion of the GPRS attach procedure

If the release of the PS signalling connection occurs before completion
of the GPRS attach procedure, then the GPRS attach procedure shall be
initiated again, if the following conditions apply:

i\) The original GPRS attach procedure was initiated over an existing PS
signalling connection; and

ii\) The GPRS attach procedure was not due to timer T3310 expiry; and

iii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Startum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection (e.g. PS
authentication procedure, see subclause 4.7.7) were received after the
ATTACH REQUEST message was transmitted.

b.2) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with, for
example, cause \"Normal\", or \"User inactivity\" (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The GPRS attach procedure shall be initiated again, if the following
conditions apply:

i\) The original GPRS attach procedure was initiated over an existing RRC
connection; and

ii\) The GPRS attach procedure was not due to timer T3310 expiry; and

iii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection (e.g. PS
authentication procedure, see subclause 4.7.7) were received after the
ATTACH REQUEST message was transmitted.

NOTE 1: The RRC connection release cause that triggers the re-initiation
of the GPRS attach procedure is implementation specific.

c\) T3310 time-out

On the first expiry of the timer, the MS shall reset and restart timer
T3310 and shall retransmit the ATTACH REQUEST message. This
retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer
T3310, the MS shall abort the GPRS attach procedure and, in Iu mode,
release the PS signalling connection (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]). The
MS shall proceed as described below.

d\) ATTACH REJECT, other causes than those treated in
subclause 4.7.3.1.4, and cases of GMM cause values \#22 and \#25, if
considered as abnormal cases according to subclause 4.7.3.1.4

If the attach request is neither for emergency bearer services nor for
initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services with attach
type not set to \"emergency attach\", upon reception of the cause codes
\# 95, \# 96, \# 97, \# 99 and \# 111 the MS should set the GPRS attach
attempt counter to 5.

The MS shall proceed as described below.

e\) Change of cell within the same RA (A/Gb mode only)

If a cell change occurs within the same RA when the MS is in state
GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED, then the cell update procedure shall be
performed before completion of the attach procedure.

f\) Change of cell into a new routing area

If a cell change into a new routing area occurs before an ATTACH ACCEPT
or ATTACH REJECT message has been received, the GPRS attach procedure
shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately. If a routing area border
is crossed when the ATTACH ACCEPT message is received but before an
ATTACH COMPLETE message is sent, the GPRS attach procedure shall be
aborted and the routing area updating procedure shall be initiated. If a
P-TMSI was allocated during the GPRS attach procedure, this P-TMSI shall
be used in the routing area updating procedure. If a P-TMSI signature
was allocated together with the P-TMSI during the GPRS attach procedure,
this P-TMSI signature shall be used in the routing area updating
procedure.

g\) Mobile originated detach required

If the MS is in state GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED, the GPRS attach
procedure shall be aborted and the GPRS detach procedure shall be
performed (see subclause 4.7.4.1).

h\) Detach procedure collision

If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message from the network in state
GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED with detach type \"re-attach not required\" and
no cause code, or \"re-attach not required\"\' and the cause code is not
\#2 \"IMSI unknown in HLR\", the GPRS detach procedure shall be
progressed and the GPRS attach procedure shall be aborted. Otherwise the
GPRS attach procedure shall be progressed and the DETACH REQUEST message
shall be ignored.

i\) \"Extended wait time\" for PS domain from the lower layers

If the ATTACH REQUEST message contained the low priority indicator set
to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\", the MS shall
start timer T3346 with the \"Extended wait time\" value and reset the
attach attempt counter.

In other cases the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

The MS shall abort the attach procedure, stay in the current serving
cell, change the state to GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH and
apply the normal cell reselection process.

j\) Timer T3346 is running

The MS shall not start the GPRS attach procedure unless the MS needs to
attach for emergency bearer services or the MS is an MS configured to
use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN or the MS needs to attach without the
NAS signalling low priority indication and if the timer T3346 was
started due to rejection of a NAS request message (e.g. ATTACH REQUEST,
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST) which contained the low
priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\". The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies normal
cell reselection process.

NOTE 2: It is considered an abnormal case if the MS needs to initiate an
attach procedure while timer T3346 is running independent on whether
timer T3346 was started due to an abnormal case or a non successful
case.

In cases b, c, d, i and j, the MS shall proceed as follows:

\- Timer T3310 shall be stopped if still running.

\- For the cases b, c, d, and i when the \"Extended wait time\" is
ignored, if the attach request is neither for emergency bearer services
nor for initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services with
attach type not set to \"emergency attach\", the GPRS attach attempt
counter shall be incremented.

\- If the GPRS attach attempt counter is less than 5:

\- for the cases i and j, the GPRS attach procedure is started, if still
necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

\- for the cases b, c, d, and i when the \"Extended wait time\" is
ignored, if the attach request is neither for emergency bearer services
nor for initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services with
attach type not set to \"emergency attach\", timer T3311 is started and
the state is changed to GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH.

\- If the GPRS attach attempt counter is greater than or equal to 5:

\- the MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, list of
equivalent PLMNs, and GPRS ciphering key sequence number, shall set the
GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED, shall start timer T3302. The
state is changed to GMM-DEREGISTERED. ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH or optionally
to GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH (see subclause 4.2.4.1.2) in order to
perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

\- If S1 mode is supported by the MS, the MS shall in addition handle
the EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited
registered TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]
for the abnormal case when a normal attach procedure fails and the
attach attempt counter is equal to 5.

##### 4.7.3.1.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Lower layer failure

If a low layer failure occurs before the message ATTACH COMPLETE has
been received from the MS and a new P-TMSI (or a new P-TMSI and a new
P-TMSI signature) has been assigned, the network shall consider both the
old and new P-TMSI each with its corresponding P-TMSI-signature as valid
until the old P-TMSI can be considered as invalid by the network (see
subclause 4.7.1.5) or the GMM context which has been marked as detached
in the network is released, and shall not resent the message ATTACH
ACCEPT. During this period the network may:

\- use the identification procedure followed by a P-TMSI reallocation
procedure if the old P-TMSI is used by the MS in a subsequent message.

b\) Protocol error

If the ATTACH REQUEST message is received with a protocol error, the
network shall return an ATTACH REJECT message with one of the following
reject causes:

\#96: Mandatory information element error;

\#99: Information element non-existent or not implemented;

\#100: Conditional IE error;

\#111: Protocol error, unspecified.

c\) T3350 time-out

On the first expiry of the timer, the network shall retransmit the
ATTACH ACCEPT message and shall reset and restart timer T3350.

This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of
timer T3350, the GPRS attach procedure shall be aborted. If a new P-TMSI
or a new P-TMSI together with a new P-TMSI signature were allocated in
the ATTACH ACCEPT message, the network shall consider both the old and
new P-TMSI each together with the corresponding P-TMSI signatures as
valid until the old P-TMSI can be considered as invalid by the network
(see subclause 4.7.1.5) or the GMM context which has been marked as
detached in the network is released. During this period the network acts
as specified for case a.

d.1) ATTACH REQUEST received after the ATTACH ACCEPT message has been
sent and before the ATTACH COMPLETE message is received

\- If one or more of the information elements in the ATTACH REQUEST
message differ from the ones received within the previous ATTACH REQUEST
message, the previously initiated GPRS attach procedure shall be aborted
if the ATTACH COMPLETE message has not been received and the new GPRS
attach procedure shall be progressed, or

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the ATTACH ACCEPT
message shall be resent and the timer T3350 shall be restarted if an
ATTACH COMPLETE message is expected. In that case, the retransmission
counter related to T3350 is not incremented.

d.2) More than one ATTACH REQUEST received and no ATTACH ACCEPT or
ATTACH REJECT message has been sent

\- If one or more of the information elements in the ATTACH REQUEST
message differs from the ones received within the previous ATTACH
REQUEST message, the previously initiated GPRS attach procedure shall be
aborted and the new GPRS attach procedure shall be progressed;

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the network shall
continue with the previous attach procedure and shall not treat any
further this ATTACH REQUEST message.

e\) ATTACH REQUEST received in state GMM-REGISTERED

If an ATTACH REQUEST message is received in state GMM-REGISTERED the
network may initiate the GMM common procedures; if it turned out that
the ATTACH REQUEST message was send by an MS that has already been
attached, the GMM context, PDP contexts and MBMS contexts, if any, are
deleted and the new ATTACH REQUEST is progressed.

f\) ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message received before ATTACH COMPLETE
message.

Timer T3350 shall be stopped. The allocated P-TMSI shall be considered
as valid and the routing area updating procedure shall be progressed as
described in subclause 4.7.5.

g\) DETACH REQUEST message received before ATTACH COMPLETE message.

The network shall abort the attach procedure and shall progress the
detach procedure as described in subclause 4.7.4.1.

![](media/image13.emf){width="5.597222222222222in"
height="3.6944444444444446in"}

Figure 4.7.3/1 3GPP TS 24.008: GPRS attach procedure and combined GPRS
attach procedure

#### 4.7.3.2 Combined GPRS attach procedure for GPRS and non-GPRS services

The combined GPRS attach procedure is a GMM procedure used by a GPRS MS
operating in MS operation modes A or B for IMSI attach for GPRS and
non-GPRS services if the network operates in network operation mode I.

If a GPRS MS operating in MS operation modes A or B is already attached
for non-GPRS services by use of the MM specific IMSI attach procedure,
but additionally wishes to perform an IMSI attach for GPRS services, the
combined GPRS attach procedure shall also be used.

The attach type information element shall indicate \"combined GPRS/IMSI
attach\". In this case, the messages ATTACH ACCEPT, ATTACH COMPLETE, and
ATTACH REJECT used by the combined GPRS attach procedure carry
information for both the GPRS and the non-GPRS services.

A GPRS MS in MS operation mode A shall perform the normal GPRS/IMSI
attach procedure during an ongoing circuit-switched transaction.

##### 4.7.3.2.1 Combined GPRS attach procedure initiation

If the MS is in GMM state GMM-DEREGISTERED and in MM state MM IDLE, the
MS initiates the combined GPRS attach procedure by sending an ATTACH
REQUEST message to the network, starts timer T3310 and enters state
GMM-REGISTERED-INITIATED and MM LOCATION UPDATING PENDING. If timer
T3302 is currently running, the MS shall stop timer T3302. If timer
T3311 is currently running, the MS shall stop timer T3311.

The MS shall set the Mobile identity IE, old RAI and P-TMSI signature in
the ATTACH REQUEST message as specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.1.
Furthermore the MS shall include the TMSI status IE if no valid TMSI is
available.

If the MS initiates a combined GPRS attach procedure for GPRS services
and \"SMS-only service\", the MS shall indicate \"SMS only\" in the
Additional update type IE.

If the MS has stored a valid LAI and the MS supports EMM combined
procedures, the MS shall include it in the Old location area
identification IE in the ATTACH REQUEST message.

If the MS has stored a valid TMSI, the MS shall include the TMSI based
NRI container IE in the ATTACH REQUEST message.

In Iu mode, if the MS wishes to prolong the established PS signalling
connection after the GPRS attach (for example, the MS has any CM
application request pending), it may set a follow-on request pending
indicator on (see subclause 4.7.13).

##### 4.7.3.2.2 GMM Common procedure initiation

The network may initiate GMM common procedures, e.g. the GMM
identification and GMM authentication and ciphering procedure, depending
on the received information such as IMSI, CKSN, old RAI, P-TMSI and
P-TMSI signature.

##### 4.7.3.2.3 Combined GPRS attach accepted by the network

Depending on the value of the attach result IE received in the ATTACH
ACCEPT message, two different cases can be distinguished:

Case 1) The attach result IE value indicates \"combined GPRS attach\":
IMSI attach for GPRS and non-GPRS services have been successful.

Case 2) The attach result IE value indicates \"GPRS only\": IMSI attach
for GPRS services has been successful but IMSI attach for non-GPRS
services has not been successful.

In Iu mode, if the network wishes to prolong the PS signalling
connection (for example, if the mobile station has indicated \"follow-on
request pending\" in ATTACH REQUEST message) the network shall indicate
the \"follow-on proceed\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT message. If the network
wishes to release the PS signalling connection, the network shall
indicate \"no follow-on proceed\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT message.

After that in Iu mode, the mobile station shall act according to the
follow-on proceed flag included in the Attach result information element
in the ATTACH ACCEPT message (see subclause 4.7.13).

##### 4.7.3.2.3.1 Combined attach successful for GPRS and non-GPRS services {#combined-attach-successful-for-gprs-and-non-gprs-services .H6}

The description for IMSI attach for GPRS services as specified in
subclause 4.7.3.1.3 shall be followed. In addition, the following
description for IMSI attach for non-GPRS services applies.

The TMSI reallocation may be part of the combined GPRS attach procedure.
The TMSI allocated is then included in the ATTACH ACCEPT message
together with the location area identification (LAI). The network shall,
in this case, change to state GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED and shall
start timer T3350 as described in subclause 4.7.6.

The MS, receiving an ATTACH ACCEPT message, stores the received location
area identification, stops timer T3310, reset the location update
attempt counter and sets the update status to U1 UPDATED. If the message
contains an IMSI, the mobile station is not allocated any TMSI, and
shall delete any TMSI accordingly. If the message contains a TMSI, the
MS shall use this TMSI as the new temporary identity. The MS shall
delete its old TMSI and shall store the new TMSI. In this case, an
ATTACH COMPLETE message is returned to the network. If neither a TMSI
nor an IMSI has been included by the network in the ATTACH ACCEPT
message, the old TMSI, if any available, shall be kept. The new MM state
is MM IDLE, the new GMM state is GMM-REGISTERED.

If the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events (see subclause 4.1.1.6A), then the MS shall
reset this counter.

If the network has requested the provision of Inter RAT handover
information, the MS shall return an ATTACH COMPLETE message including
the Inter RAT handover information IE to the network.

If the MS is not configured for NAS signalling low priority then the MS
may stop timer T3246 if running.

Any timer used for triggering the location update procedure (e.g T3211,
T3212) shall be stopped if running.

The network receiving an ATTACH COMPLETE message stops timer T3350,
changes to state GMM-REGISTERED.

NOTE: Upon receiving an ATTACH COMPLETE message, the SGSN sends a
BSSAP+-TMSI-REALLOCATION-COMPLETE message as specified in
3GPP TS 29.018 \[149\].

##### 4.7.3.2.3.2 Combined attach successful for GPRS services only {#combined-attach-successful-for-gprs-services-only .H6}

Apart from the actions on the routing area updating attempt counter, the
description for IMSI attach for GPRS services as specified in
subclause 4.7.3.1.3 shall be followed. In addition, the following
description for IMSI attach for non-GPRS services applies.

The SGSN shall use GMM cause \#28 \"SMS provided via GPRS in this
routing area\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT message only if the MS requested
\"SMS-only service\" by including the Additional update type IE in the
ATTACH REQUEST message.

The MS receiving the ATTACH ACCEPT message takes one of the following
actions depending on the GMM cause:

\# 2 (IMSI unknown in HLR)

The MS shall stop timer T3310 if still running and shall reset the
routing area updating attempt counter. The MS shall set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The MS shall enter state
GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The new MM state is MM IDLE. The SIM/USIM
shall be considered as invalid for non-GPRS services until switching off
or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

\# 16 (MSC temporarily not reachable); or

\# 17 (Network failure)

The MS shall stop timer T3310 if still running, and shall enter state
MM-IDLE. The routing area updating attempt counter shall be incremented.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is less than 5, and the
stored RAI is equal to the RAI of the current serving cell and the GMM
update status is equal to GU1 UPDATED:

\- the MS shall keep the GMM update status GU1 UPDATED and changes state
to GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM. The MS shall start timer
T3311. When timer T3311 expires the combined routing area update
procedure indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\" is
triggered again.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is greater than or equal to
5:

\- the MS shall start timer T3302 and shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM;

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall then proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedure; a GPRS MS operating in MS operation
mode B may then proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures. The MM
sublayer shall act as in network operation mode II as long as the
combined GMM procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered.

\# 22 (Congestion)

The MS shall change to state GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM,
shall stop timer T3310 if still running, and shall enter state MM-IDLE.
The MS shall set the routing area updating attempt counter to 5 and
shall start the timer T3302.

\# 28 (SMS provided via GPRS in this routing area);

The MS shall stop timer T3310 if still running and shall reset the
routing area updating attempt counter. The MS shall set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The MS shall enter state
GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process.

Other GMM causevalues and the case that no GMM cause IE was received are
considered as abnormal cases. The combined attach procedure shall be
considered as failed for non-GPRS services. The behaviour of the MS in
those cases is specified in subclause 4.7.3.2.5.

##### 4.7.3.2.4 Combined GPRS attach not accepted by the network

If the attach request can neither be accepted by the network for GPRS
nor for non-GPRS services, an ATTACH REJECT message is transferred to
the MS. The MS receiving the ATTACH REJECT message containing a reject
cause other than GMM cause value \#25 or the message is integrity
protected, shall stop the timer T3310, and for all causes except \#7,
\#12, \#14, \#15, \#22 and \#25 deletes the list of \"equivalent
PLMNs\".

If the ATTACH REJECT message containing GMM cause value \#25 was
received without integrity protection, then the MS shall discard the
message.

If the attach request is rejected due to NAS level mobility management
congestion control, the network shall set the GMM cause value to \#22
\"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3346.

The MS shall then take one of the following actions depending upon the
reject cause:

\# 3 (Illegal MS);

\# 6 (Illegal ME), or

\# 8 (GPRS services and non-GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The new GMM state is GMM-DEREGISTERED. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall
delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number. The SIM/USIM
shall be considered as invalid for GPRS and non-GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as
described in subclause 4.1.1.6.

If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower
layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\",
then the MS shall set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum
value.

NOTE 1: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9 for reject cause \#8

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the combined attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 7 (GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The new GMM state is
GMM-DEREGISTERED; the MM state is MM IDLE.

If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower
layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE 2: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B shall proceed with the
appropriate MM specific procedure according to the MM service state.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the combined attach procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 11 (PLMN not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2),
shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter and changes to state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the
location update attempt counter and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and
if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\]
or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall start timer T3245 and
proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined attach procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 12 (Location area not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature GPRS ciphering key
sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED(and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the
location update attempt counter and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
regional provision of service\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall perform a cell selection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\]
and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 3: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined attach procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 13 (Roaming not allowed in this location area);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED(and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE or optionally to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the
location update attempt counter and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined attach procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 14 (GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status
to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to
subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter and
shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" list and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the
message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and
the MS maintains a PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter for that PLMN, then
the MS shall set this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum
value.

As an implementation option, a GPRS MS operating in operation mode A or
B may perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If an MS in GAN mode performs a PLMN selection, it shall request a PLMN
list in GAN (see 3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN
selection from this list according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

The MS shall not perform the optional PLMN selection in the case where
the PLMN providing this reject cause is:

\- On the \"User Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology\";

\- On the \"Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology\"
list;

\- On the \"PLMN Selector\" list for an MS using a SIM/USIM without
access technology information storage (i.e. the \"User Controlled PLMN
Selector with Access Technology\" and the \"Operator Controlled PLMN
Selector with Access Technology\" data files are not present); or

\- A PLMN identified as equivalent to any PLMN, within the same country,
contained in the lists above.

If the MS does not perform a PLMN selection then a GPRS MS operating in
MS operation mode A or B which is not yet IMSI attached for CS services
in the network shall then perform an IMSI attach for non-GPRS services
according to the conditions for the MM IMSI attach procedure (see
subclause 4.4.3).

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B shall proceed with the
appropriate MM specific procedure according to the MM service state.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined attach procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 15 (No Suitable Cells In Location Area);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED(and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, reset the
location update attempt counter and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or a
tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

NOTE 4: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined attach procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 22 (Congestion);

If the T3346 value IE is present in the ATTACH REJECT message and the
value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall be considered as an
abnormal case and the behaviour of the MS for this case is specified in
subclause 4.7.3.1.5.

The MS shall abort the attach procedure, reset the GPRS attach attempt
counter, set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED and enter state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH.

The MS shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

If the ATTACH REJECT message is integrity protected, the MS shall start
timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

If the ATTACH REJECT message is not integrity protected, the MS shall
start timer T3346 with a random value from the default range specified
in table 11.3a.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process. The attach procedure is started, if still
necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and attach attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the attach
procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 25 (Not authorized for this CSG)

Cause \#25 is only applicable in UTRAN Iu mode and when received from a
CSG cell. Other cases are considered as abnormal cases and the
specification of the mobile station behaviour is given in
subclause 4.7.3.2.5.

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset the GPRS
attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ATTACH REQUEST message are contained in the Allowed CSG list
stored in the MS, the MS shall remove the entry corresponding to this
CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the Allowed CSG list.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ATTACH REQUEST message are contained in the Operator CSG list,
the MS shall proceed as specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]
subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If the MS is IMSI attached for non-GPRS services, the MS shall set the
update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location
update attempt counter. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined attach procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The specification of the
MS behaviour in those cases is specified in subclause 4.7.3.2.5.

##### 4.7.3.2.5 Abnormal cases in the MS

The MS shall proceed as follows:

1\) If the combined attach was successful for GPRS services only and the
ATTACH ACCEPT message contained a cause value not treated in
subclause 4.7.3.2.3.2 or the GMM Cause IE is not included in the
message, the MS shall proceed as follows:

a\) The MS shall stop timer T3310 if still running, and shall enter state
MM IDLE. The routing area updating attempt counter shall be incremented;

b\) If the routing area updating attempt counter is less than 5, and the
stored RAI is equal to the RAI of the current serving cell and the GMM
update status is equal to GU1 UPDATED:

\- the MS shall keep the GMM update status GU1 UPDATED and changes state
to GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM. The MS shall start timer
T3311. When timer T3311 expires the combined routing area update
procedure indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\" is
triggered again; and

c\) If the routing area updating attempt counter is greater than or equal
to 5:

\- the MS shall start timer T3302 and shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM; and

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall then proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedure; a GPRS MS operating in MS operation
mode B may then proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures. The MM
sublayer shall act as in network operation mode II as long as the
combined GMM procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered; and

2\) Otherwise, the abnormal cases specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.5 apply
with the following modification.

If the GPRS attach attempt counter is incremented according to
subclause 4.7.3.1.5 the next actions depend on the Location Area
Identities (stored on SIM/USIM and the one of the current serving cell)
and the value of the attach attempt counter:

\- if the update status is U1 UPDATED, and the stored LAI is equal to
the one of the current serving cell and the attach attempt counter is
smaller than 5, then the mobile station shall keep the update status to
U1 UPDATED, the new MM state is MM IDLE substate NORMAL SERVICE;

\- if the attach attempt counter is smaller than 5 and, additionally,
the update status is different from U1 UPDATED or the stored LAI is
different from the one of the current serving cell, then the mobile
station shall delete any LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence number stored
in the SIM/USIM and list of equivalent PLMNs and set the update status
to U2 NOT UPDATED. The MM state remains MM LOCATION UPDATING PENDING; or

\- if the attach attempt counter is greater or equal to 5, then the
mobile station shall delete any LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence number
stored in the SIM/USIM and list of equivalent PLMNs and set the update
status to U2 NOT UPDATED.\
A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall then proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedure; a GPRS MS operating in MS operation
mode B may then proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures.\
The MM sublayer shall act as in network operation mode II as long as the
combined GMM procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered. The
new MM state is MM IDLE substate ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE or optionally MM
IDLE substate PLMN SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according
to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

##### 4.7.3.2.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The abnormal cases specified in subclause 4.7.3.1.6 apply.

### 4.7.4 GPRS detach procedure

#### 4.7.4.0 General

The GPRS detach procedure is used:

\- to detach the IMSI for GPRS services only. Independent of the network
operation mode, this procedure is used by all kind of GPRS MSs;

\- as a combined GPRS detach procedure used by GPRS MSs operating in MS
operation mode A or B to detach the IMSI for GPRS and non-GPRS services
or for non-GPRS services only, if the network operates in network
operation mode I and no circuit-switched transaction is ongoing;

\- in the case of a network failure condition to indicate to the MS that
a re-attach with successive activation of previously active PDP contexts
shall be performed. In this case, the MS may also perform the procedures
needed in order to activate any previously active multicast service(s);
or

\- to detach the IMSI or IMEI for emergency bearer services.

After completion of a GPRS detach procedure or combined GPRS detach
procedure for GPRS and non-GPRS services the GMM context is released.

An eCall only mobile station that is not capable of eCall over IMS shall
not perform any kind of GPRS detach procedure.

The GPRS detach procedure shall be invoked by the MS if the MS is
switched off, the SIM/USIM card is removed from the MS or if the GPRS or
non-GPRS capability of the MS is disabled. The procedure may be invoked
by the network to detach the IMSI for GPRS services. The GPRS detach
procedure causes the MS to be marked as inactive in the network for GPRS
services, non-GPRS services or both services.

If the detach procedure is triggered due to SIM/USIM removal, the MS
shall indicate \"switch off\" in the detach type IE.

If a detach is requested by the HLR for an MS that has a PDP context for
emergency services, the SGSN shall not send a DETACH REQUEST message to
the MS, and shall follow the procedure described in subclause 6.1.3.4.2
for an MS that has PDP contexts for emergency bearer services.

When upper layers indicates that emergency bearer services are no longer
required, the MS if still attached for emergency bearer services, may
perform a detach followed by a re-attach to regain normal services, if
the MS is in or moves to a suitable cell.

In A/Gb mode, if the GPRS detach procedure is performed, the PDP
contexts and the MBMS contexts, if any, are deactivated locally without
peer to peer signalling between the SM and LLC entities in the MS and
the network.

In Iu mode, if the GPRS detach procedure is performed, the PDP contexts
and the MBMS contexts, if any, are deactivated locally without peer to
peer signalling between the SM entities in the MS and the network.

If the MS supports S1 mode, the MS shall store the TIN in the
non-volatile memory in the ME, as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\],
annex C, for a subsequent attach procedure.

The MS is allowed to initiate the GPRS detach procedure even if the
timer T3346 is running.

The network proceeds with the GPRS detach procedure even if NAS level
mobility management congestion control is active.

#### 4.7.4.1 MS initiated GPRS detach procedure

##### 4.7.4.1.1 MS initiated GPRS detach procedure initiation

The GPRS detach procedure is initiated by the MS by sending a DETACH
REQUEST message. The detach type information element may indicate \"GPRS
detach with switching off\", \"GPRS detach without switching off\",
\"IMSI detach\", \"GPRS/IMSI detach with switching off\" or \"GPRS/IMSI
detach without switching off\".

If the MS has a valid P-TMSI, the MS shall include the P-TMSI in the
DETACH REQUEST message. The MS shall also include a valid P-TMSI
signature, if available.

If the MS is not switched off and the MS is in the state
GMM\_REGISTERED, timer T3321 shall be started after the DETACH REQUEST
message has been sent. If the detach type information element value
indicates \"IMSI Detach\" the MS shall enter
GMM-REGISTERED.IMSI-DETACH\_INITIATED, otherwise the MS shall enter the
state GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED. If the detach type information element
value indicates \"IMSI Detach\" or \"GPRS/IMSI Detach\", state MM IMSI
DETACH PENDING is entered. If the MS to be switched off is not a MS
using any of the coverage classes of EC-GSM-IoT, the MS shall try for a
period of 5 seconds to send the DETACH REQUEST message. If the MS to be
switched off is a MS using any of the coverage classes of EC-GSM-IoT,
that MS should try for at least a period of 10 seconds to send the
DETACH REQUEST message. If the MS is able to send the DETACH REQUEST
message during this time the MS may be switched off.

If the detach type information element value indicates \"GPRS detach
without switching off \" and the MS is attached for GPRS and non-GPRS
services and the network operates in network operation mode I, then if
in the MS the timer T3212 is not already running, the timer T3212 shall
be set to its initial value and restarted after the DETACH REQUEST
message has been sent.

##### 4.7.4.1.2 MS initiated GPRS detach procedure completion for GPRS services only

When the DETACH REQUEST message is received by the network, the network
shall send a DETACH ACCEPT message to the MS, if the detach type IE
value indicates that the detach request has not been sent due to
switching off. If switching off was indicated, the procedure is
completed when the network receives the DETACH REQUEST message. The
network and the MS shall deactivate the PDP contexts, the MBMS contexts
and deactivate the logical link(s), if any.

The MS is marked as inactive in the network for GPRS services; state
GMM-DEREGISTERED is entered in the MS and the network.

In Iu mode, if the detach has been sent due to switching off, then the
network shall release the resources in the lower layers for this MS (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

NOTE: When the DETACH REQUEST message is received by the network, and if
the detach type IE value indicates that the detach is not due to power
off, the authentication and ciphering procedure as well as the
identification procedure may be performed.

If the MS supports S1 mode and operates in MS operation mode A or B ,
the MS shall disable the E‑UTRA capability (see 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]).

##### 4.7.4.1.3 MS initiated combined GPRS detach procedure completion

When the DETACH REQUEST message is received by the network, a DETACH
ACCEPT message shall be sent to the MS, if the detach type IE value
indicates that the detach request has not been sent due to switching
off. Depending on the value of the detach type IE the following applies:

GPRS/IMSI detach:\
The MS is marked as inactive in the network for GPRS and for non-GPRS
services. The network and the MS shall deactivate the PDP contexts, the
MBMS contexts and deactivate the logical link(s), if any. The States
GMM-DEREGISTERED and MM NULL are entered in both the MS and the network.

In Iu mode, if the detach has been sent due to switching off, then the
network shall release the resources in the lower layers for this MS (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

IMSI detach:\
The MS is marked as inactive in the network for non-GPRS services. State
MM NULL is entered in the MS and the network.

##### 4.7.4.1.4 Abnormal cases in the MS

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) T3321 time-out

On the first expiry of the timer, the MS shall retransmit the DETACH
REQUEST message and shall reset and restart timer T3321. This
retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer
T3321, the GPRS detach procedure shall be aborted, the MS shall change
to state:

\- MM-NULL if \"IMSI detach\" was requested;

\- GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE if \"IMSI Detach\" was requested;

\- GMM-DEREGISTERED if \"GPRS detach\" was requested;

\- GMM-DEREGISTERED and MM-NULL if \"GPRS/IMSI\" detach was requested.

b\) Lower layer failure before reception of DETACH ACCEPT message

The detach procedure is aborted and the MS shall change to one of the
following states, except in the following implementation option cases
b.1, b.2 and b3:

\- MM-NULL if \"IMSI detach\" was requested;

\- GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE if \"IMSI Detach\" was requested;

\- GMM-DEREGISTERED if \"GPRS detach\" was requested;

\- GMM-DEREGISTERED and MM-NULL if \"IMSI/GPRS\" detach was requested.

b.1) Release of PS signalling connection before the completion of the
GPRS detach procedure

The release of the PS signalling connection before completion of the
GPRS detach procedure shall result in the GPRS detach procedure being
initiated again, if the following conditions apply:

i\) The original GPRS detach procedure was initiated over an existing PS
signalling connection; and

ii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection (e.g. PS
authentication procedure, see subclause 4.7.7) were received after the
DETACH REQUEST message was transmitted.

b.2) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with cause
different than \"Directed signalling connection re-establishment\", for
example, \"Normal\", or\"User inactivity\" (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]
and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The GPRS detach procedure shall be initiated again, if the following
conditions apply:

i\) The original GPRS detach procedure was initiated over an exisiting
RRC connection; and

ii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection (e.g. PS
authentication procedure, see subclause 4.7.7) were received after the
DETACH REQUEST message was transmitted.

NOTE: The RRC connection release cause different than \"Directed
signalling connection re-establishment\" that triggers the re-initiation
of the GPRS detach procedure is implementation specific.

b.3) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with cause
\"Directed signalling connection re-establishment\" (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The routing area updating procedure shall be initiated followed by
completion of the GPRS detach procedure if the following conditions
apply:

i\) The original GPRS detach procedure was not due to SIM removal; and

ii\) The original GPRS detach procedure was not due to a rerun of the
procedure due to \"Directed signalling connection reestablishment\".

c\) Detach procedure collision

GPRS detach containing cause \"power off\":

\- If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the MS initiated
GPRS detach procedure has been completed, this message shall be ignored
and the MS initiated GPRS detach procedure shall continue.

GPRS detach containing other causes than \"power off\":

\- If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the MS initiated
GPRS detach procedure has been completed, the MS shall treat the message
as specified in subclause 4.7.4.2.2 with the following modifications:

\- If the DETACH REQUEST message received by the MS contains detach type
\"re-attach required\", and the MS initiated detach procedure is with
detach type \"GPRS detach\" or \"Combined GPRS/IMSI detach\", the MS
need not initiate the GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure.

\- If the DETACH REQUEST message received by the MS contains detach type
\"IMSI detach\", and the MS initiated detach procedure is with detach
type \"IMSI detach\", the MS in operation mode A or B in network
operation mode I need not re-attach to non-GPRS services.

\- If the DETACH REQUEST message received by the MS contains detach type
\"IMSI detach\", and the MS initiated detach procedure is with detach
type \"GPRS detach\" or \"combined GPRS/IMSI detach\", the MS shall
progress both procedures. The MS in operation mode A or B in network
operation mode I need not re-attach to non-GPRS services.

d\) Detach and GMM common procedure collision

GPRS detach containing cause \"power off\":

\- If the MS receives a message used in a GMM common procedure before
the GPRS detach procedure has been completed, this message shall be
ignored and the GPRS detach procedure shall continue.

GPRS detach containing other causes than \"power off\" and containing
detach type \"IMSI detach\":

\- If the MS receives a message used in a GMM common procedure before
the GPRS detach procedure has been completed, both the GMM common
procedure and the GPRS detach procedure shall continue.

GPRS detach containing other causes than \"power off\" and containing
other detach types than \"IMSI detach\":

\- If the MS receives a P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND, a GMM STATUS, or a
GMM INFORMATION message before the GPRS detach procedure has been
completed, this message shall be ignored and the GPRS detach procedure
shall continue.

\- If the MS receives an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST or
IDENTITY REQUEST message, before the GPRS detach procedure has been
completed, the MS shall respond to it as described in subclauses 4.7.7
and 4.7.8 respectively.

e\) Change of cell within the same RA (A/Gb mode only)

If a cell change occurs within the same RA before a DETACH ACCEPT
message has been received, then the cell update procedure shall be
performed before completion of the detach procedure.

f\) Change of cell into a new routing area

If a cell change into a new routing area occurs before a DETACH ACCEPT
message has been received, the GPRS detach procedure shall be aborted
and re-initiated after successfully performing a routing area updating
procedure. If the detach procedure is performed due to the removal of
the SIM/USIM or the MS is to be switched off, the MS shall abort the
detach procedure and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

g\) Access barred because of access class control or EAB

The signalling procedure for GPRS detach shall not be started. The MS
starts the signalling procedure as soon as possible and if still
necessary, i.e. when the barred state is removed or because of a cell
change, or performs a local detach immediately or after an
implementation dependent time.

h\) Detach and paging for non-GRPS services procedure collision

If the MS receives a paging for non-GPRS services before the MS
initiated combined GPRS detach procedure with detach type \"IMSI
detach\" or \"GPRS/IMSI detach\" has been completed, then the paging for
non-GPRS services shall be ignored and the MS initiated combined GPRS
detach procedure shall continue.

![](media/image14.emf){width="5.597222222222222in"
height="2.5833333333333335in"}

Figure 4.7.4/1 3GPP TS 24.008: MS initiated GPRS detach procedure

##### 4.7.4.1.5 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Detach request received in a CSG cell for which the MS has no valid
CSG subscription

If the MS initiates a detach procedure in a CSG cell the CSG ID of which
is not valid for the MS and the detach procedure is not due to \"switch
off\", the network shall proceed as follows:

\- if the detach type is \"IMSI detach\" and the MS has a PDN connection
for emergency bearer services active, the SGSN shall send a DETACH
ACCEPT message and deactivate all non-emergency PDP contexts, if any, by
initiating a PDP context deactivation procedure;

\- otherwise, the network shall initiate the detach procedure. The
network shall send a DETACH REQUEST message including the GMM cause
value \#25 \"not authorized for this CSG\".

#### 4.7.4.2 Network initiated GPRS detach procedure

##### 4.7.4.2.1 Network initiated GPRS detach procedure initiation

The network initiates the GPRS detach procedure by sending a DETACH
REQUEST message to the MS. The DETACH REQUEST message shall include a
detach type IE. In addition, the network may include a cause IE to
specify the reason for the detach request. The network shall start timer
T3322. If the detach type IE indicates \"re-attach required\", or
\"re-attach not required\" and the cause code is not \#2 \"IMSI unknown
in HLR\", the network shall deactivate the PDP contexts, the MBMS
contexts and deactivate the logical link(s), if any, and shall change to
state GMM-DEREGISTERED-INITIATED.

##### 4.7.4.2.2 Network initiated GPRS detach procedure completion by the MS

When receiving the DETACH REQUEST message and the detach type indicates
\"re-attach required\", the MS shall deactivate the PDP context(s), the
MBMS context(s) and deactivate the logical link(s), if any. The MS shall
stop the timer T3346, if it is running. The MS shall also stop timer(s)
T3396, if it is running. The MS shall send a DETACH ACCEPT message to
the network and shall enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED. The MS shall,
after the completion of the GPRS detach procedure, initiate a GPRS
attach procedure. The MS should also activate PDP context(s) that were
originally activated by the MS to replace any previously MS activated
PDP context(s). The MS should also perform the procedures needed in
order to activate any previously active multicast service(s).

NOTE 1: When the detach type indicates \"re-attach required\", user
interaction is necessary in some cases when the MS cannot re-activate
the PDP/MBMS context(s) automatically.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I, which receives an DETACH REQUEST message with detach type
indicating \"re-attach required\" or \"re-attach not required\" and no
cause code, is only detached for GPRS services in the network.

When receiving the DETACH REQUEST message and the detach type IE
indicates \"IMSI detach\", the MS shall not deactivate the PDP/MBMS
contexts. The MS shall set the MM update status to U2 NOT UPDATED. An MS
in operation mode A or B in network operation mode I may send a DETACH
ACCEPT message to the network, and shall re-attach to non-GPRS service
by performing the combined routing area updating procedure according to
subclause 4.7.5.2, sending a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message with
Update type IE indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\".
An MS in operation mode A that is in an ongoing circuit-switched
transaction shall initiate the combined routing area updating after the
circuit-switched transaction has been released. An MS in operation mode
C, or in MS operation mode A or B in network operation mode II, shall
send a DETACH ACCEPT message to the network.

If the detach type IE indicates \"IMSI detach\", or \"re-attach
required\" then the MS shall ignore the cause code if received.

If the MS is attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services and the network
operates in network operation mode I, then if in the MS the timer T3212
is not already running, the timer T3212 shall be set to its initial
value and restarted if:

\- the detach type IE indicates \"re-attach required\"; or

\- the detach type IE indicates \"re-attach not required\" and no cause
code is included.

When receiving the DETACH REQUEST message and the detach type IE
indicates \"re-attach not required\" and no cause code, or \"re-attach
not required\" and the cause code is not \#2 \"IMSI unknown in HLR\",
the MS shall deactivate the PDP contexts, the MBMS contexts and
deactivate the logical link(s), if any. The MS shall then send a DETACH
ACCEPT message to the network and shall change state to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.

If the detach type IE indicates \"re-attach not required\" and no cause
code is included,

\- the MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED, delete
the GMM parameters P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI, and GPRS ciphering key
sequence number, and start timer T3302. If the MS is operating in MS
operation mode C, it may enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH in
order to perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[6\];
otherwise the MS shall enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-ATTACH; and

\- if S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI, as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the no EMM cause included
and with detach type set to \"re-attach not required\".

If the detach type IE indicates \"re-attach not required\" and a cause
code is included, then, depending on the received cause code, the MS
shall act as follows:

\# 2 (IMSI unknown in HLR);

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall
delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state
is MM IDLE. The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for non-GPRS
services until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message
has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS
maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS
services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I, is still IMSI attached for GPRS services in the network.

\# 3 (Illegal MS);

\# 6 (Illegal ME);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The MS shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs. The new GMM state is
GMM-DEREGISTERED. The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS
services until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message
has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS
maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B shall in addition set
the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI
and ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is operating in MS
operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall abort the RR
connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The SIM/USIM shall be
considered as invalid also for non-GPRS services until switching off or
the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been successfully integrity
checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same
value and with detach type set to \"re-attach not required\".

NOTE 2: The possibility to configure an MS so that the radio transceiver
for a specific radio access technology is not active, although it is
implemented in the MS, is out of scope of the present specification.

\# 7 (GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The new state is
GMM-DEREGISTERED. If the message has been successfully integrity checked
by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM
considered invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this
counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services is still IMSI attached for CS services in the
network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I shall then proceed with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

NOTE 3: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same
value and with detach type set to \"re-attach not required\".

\# 8 (GPRS services and non-GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The MS shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs. The new GMM state is
GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall
delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is
operating in MS operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS
shall abort the RR connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The
SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS and non-GPRS services
until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services\", then
the MS shall set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum
value. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the
lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to
MS implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE 4: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when a DETACH REQUEST is received with the EMM cause with the same
value and with detach type set to \"re-attach not required\".

\# 11 (PLMN not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI or LAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2)
and shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter. The MS shall delete the
list of equivalent PLMNs. The new GMM state is GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and
if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\]
or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall start timer T3245 and
proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B shall set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received
with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to
\"re-attach not required\".

\# 12 (Location area not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature GPRS ciphering key
sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED(and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
regional provision of service\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a cell selection according to 3GPP
TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 5: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received
with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to
\"re-attach not required\".

\# 13 (Roaming not allowed in this location area);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The MS shall delete the list of
equivalent PLMNs. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE or optionally to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122
\[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see 3GPP TS 44.318
\[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received
with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to
\"re-attach not required\".

\# 14 (GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status
to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to
subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset the GPRS attach attempt counter and
shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" list and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the
message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and
the MS maintains a PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter for that PLMN, then
the MS shall set this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum
value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode C shall delete the list of
equivalent PLMNs and perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services is still IMSI attached for CS services in the
network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I shall then proceed with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received
with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to
\"re-attach not required\".

\# 15 (No Suitable Cells In Location Area);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED(and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset
the GPRS attach attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or a
tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

NOTE 6: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state and EPS update status, GUTI, last visited
registered TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received
with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to
\"re-attach not required\".

\# 25 (Not authorized for this CSG)

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset the GPRS attach
attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the cell where the MS has received the DETACH REQUEST message is a
CSG cell and the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell are
contained in the Allowed CSG list stored in the MS, the MS shall remove
the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the Allowed CSG list.

If the cell where the MS has received the DETACH REQUEST message is a
CSG cell and the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell are
contained in the Operator CSG list, the MS shall proceed as specified in
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If the MS is IMSI attached for non-GPRS services, the MS shall set the
update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location
update attempt counter. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state and EPS update status, GUTI, last visited
registered TAI, TAI list, KSI and attach attempt counter as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when a DETACH REQUEST is received
with the EMM cause with the same value and with detach type set to
\"re-attach not required\".

NOTE 7: CSG is applicable only for UMTS.

Other cause values shall not impact the update status. Further actions
of the MS are implementation dependent.

##### 4.7.4.2.3 Network initiated GPRS detach procedure completion by the network

The network shall, upon receipt of the DETACH ACCEPT message, stop timer
T3322. If the detach type IE included in the DETACH REQUEST message
indicates \"IMSI detach\", or \"re-attach not required\" and the cause
code is \#2 \"IMSI unknown in HLR\", the network shall not change the
current GMM state; otherwise the network shall change state to
GMM-DEREGISTERED.

##### 4.7.4.2.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) T3322 time-out

On the first expiry of the timer, the network shall retransmit the
DETACH REQUEST message and shall start timer T3322. This retransmission
is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3322, the
GPRS detach procedure shall be aborted. If the detach type indicates
\"IMSI detach\", or \"re-attach not required\" and the cause code is \#2
\"IMSI unknown in HLR\", the network shall not change the current GMM
state; otherwise the network shall change state to GMM-DEREGISTERED.

b\) Low layer failure

The GPRS detach procedure is aborted. If the detach type indicates
\"IMSI detach\", or \"re-attach not required\" and the cause code is \#2
\"IMSI unknown in HLR\", the network shall not change the current GMM
state; otherwise the network shall change state to GMM-DEREGISTERED.

c\) GPRS detach procedure collision

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message with \"switching off\"
indicated, before the network initiated GPRS detach procedure has been
completed, both procedures shall be considered completed.

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message without \"switching
off\" indicated, before the network initiated GPRS detach procedure has
been completed, the network shall send a DETACH ACCEPT message to the
MS.

d\) GPRS detach and GPRS attach procedure collision

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message before the network
initiated GPRS detach procedure with type of detach \'re-attach not
required\' has been completed, the network shall ignore the ATTACH
REQUEST message. If the detach type IE value, sent in the DETACH REQUEST
message, indicates \"re-attach required\" the detach procedure is
aborted and the GPRS attach procedure shall be progressed after the PDP
contexts and MBMS contexts, if any, have been deleted. If the detach
type IE value, sent in the DETACH REQUEST message, indicates \"IMSI
detach\" the detach procedure is aborted and the GPRS attach procedure
shall be progressed.

e\) GPRS detach and routing area updating procedure collision

GPRS detach containing detach type \"re-attach required\" or \"re-attach
not required\":

If the network receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message before the
network initiated GPRS detach procedure has been completed, the detach
procedure shall be progressed, i.e. the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message shall be ignored. If the DETACH REQUEST message contains detach
type \"re-attach not required\" and GMM cause \#2 \"IMSI unknown in
HLR\", the network will follow the procedure as described below for the
detach type \"IMSI detach\".

GPRS detach containing detach type \"IMSI detach\":

If the network receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message before the
network initiated GPRS detach procedure has been completed, the network
shall abort the detach procedure, shall stop T3322 and shall progress
the routing area update procedure.

f\) GPRS detach and service request procedure collision

GPRS detach containing detach type \"re-attach required\" or \"re-attach
not required\":

If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message before the network
initiated GPRS detach procedure has been completed, the network shall
progress the detach procedure. If the GPRS Detach Request message
contains detach type \"re-attach not required\" and GMM cause \#2 \"IMSI
unknown in HLR\", the network will follow the procedure as described
below for the detach type \"IMSI detach\".

GPRS detach containing detach type \"IMSI detach\":

If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message before the network
initiated GPRS detach procedure has been completed, the network shall
progress both procedures.

![](media/image15.emf){width="5.611111111111111in"
height="1.6111111111111112in"}

Figure 4.7.4/2 3GPP TS 24.008: Network initiated GPRS detach procedure

### 4.7.5 Routing area updating procedure

This procedure is used for:

\- normal routing area updating to update the registration of the actual
routing area of an MS in the network. This procedure is used by GPRS MSs
in MS operation mode C and by GPRS MSs in MS operation modes A or B that
are IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services if the network operates
in network operation mode II;

\- combined routing area updating to update the registration of the
actual routing and location area of an MS in the network. This procedure
is used by GPRS MSs in MS operation modes A or B that are IMSI attached
for GPRS and non-GPRS services provided that the network operates in
network operation mode I;

\- periodic routing area updating. This procedure is used by GPRS MSs in
MS operation mode C and by GPRS MSs in MS operation modes A or B that
are IMSI attached for GPRS or for GPRS and non-GPRS services independent
of the network operation mode;

\- IMSI attach for non-GPRS services when the MS is IMSI attached for
GPRS services. This procedure is used by GPRS MSs in MS operation modes
A or B, if the network operates in network operation mode I;

\- in A/Gb mode, resuming GPRS services when the RR sublayer indicated a
resumption failure after dedicated mode was left, see
3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\];

\- in A/Gb mode, updating the network with the new MS Radio Access
Capability IE when the content of the IE has changed;

\- updating the network with the new DRX parameter IE when the content
of the IE has changed;

NOTE 1: Such changes can be used e.g. when the MS activates a PDP
context with service requirements that cannot be met with the current
DRX parameter. As PDP context(s) are activated and deactivated, the GMM
context will be updated with an appropriate DRX parameter;

\- re-negotiation of the READY timer value;

\- Iu mode to A/Gb mode and for A/Gb mode to Iu mode intersystem change,
see subclause 4.7.1.7;

\- in Iu mode, re-synchronizing the PMM mode of MS and network after RRC
connection release with cause \"Directed signalling connection
re-establishment\", see subclause 4.7.2.5;

\- in Iu mode and A/Gb mode after intersystem change from S1 mode, and
the GMM receives an indication of \"RRC connection failure\" from lower
layers due to lower layer failure while in S1 mode;

\- S1 mode to Iu mode or S1 mode to A/Gb mode intersystem change and ISR
is not activated;

\- S1 mode to Iu mode or S1 mode to A/Gb mode intersystem change and ISR
is activated, but the MS changes to a routeing area it has not
previously registered with the network;

\- indicating to the network that due to a manual CSG selection the MS
has selected a CSG cell whose CSG identity and associated PLMN identity
are not included in the MS\'s Allowed CSG list or in the MS\'s Operator
CSG list;

\- indicating to the network that the mobile station classmark 2, mobile
station classmark 3 or the supported codecs have changed for a MS
supporting SRVCC; or

\- indicating the current radio access technology to the network for the
support of terminating access domain selection for voice calls or voice
sessions (for details see subclause 4.7.5.1 and subclause 4.7.5.2.1).

While an MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services, the MS
shall not perform manual CSG selection.

The routing area updating procedure shall also be used by a MS which is
attached for GPRS services if a new PLMN is entered (see
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]), unless the MS is configured for
\"AttachWithIMSI\" as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\] and the new PLMN is neither the registered PLMN
nor in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

An eCall only mobile station that is not capable of eCall over IMS shall
not perform a normal or combined routing area updating procedure.

Subclause 4.7.5.1 describes the routing area updating procedures for
updating the routing area only. The combined routing area updating
procedure used to update both the routing and location area is described
in subclause 4.7.5.2.

The routing area updating procedure is always initiated by the MS. It is
only invoked in state GMM-REGISTERED.

To limit the number of consecutive rejected routing area update
attempts, a routing area updating attempt counter is introduced. The
routing area updating attempt counter shall be incremented as specified
in subclause 4.7.5.1.5. Depending on the value of the routing area
updating attempt counter, specific actions shall be performed. The
routing area updating attempt counter shall be reset when:

\- a GPRS attach or combined GPRS attach procedure is successfully
completed;

\- a normal or periodic routing area updating or combined routing area
updating procedure is successfully completed;

\- a combined GPRS attach procedure or a combined routing area updating
procedure is completed for GPRS services only with cause \#2 or \#28;

> \- a normal or periodic routing area updating or combined routing
> updating procedure is rejected with cause \#11, \#12, \#13, \#14, \#15
> or \#25;

\- a new PLMN is selected.

and additionally when the MS is in substate ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE:

\- a new routing area is entered;

\- expiry of timer T3302;

\- at request from registration function; or

\- timer T3346 is started.

The mobile equipment shall contain a list of \"forbidden location areas
for roaming\", as well as a list of \"forbidden location areas for
regional provision of service\". The handling of these lists is
described in subclause 4.4.1.

In a shared network, the MS shall choose one of the PLMN identities as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]. The MS shall construct the Routing
Area Identification of the cell from this chosen PLMN identity, and the
LAC and the RAC received on the BCCH. If the constructed RAI is
different from the stored RAI, the MS shall initiate the routing area
updating procedure. For:

\- a shared GERAN, in A/Gb mode, the chosen PLMN identity is indicated
to the GERAN in the first RLC data block of an upper layer PDU (see
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\]) when a foreign TLLI is used by the network
sharing supporting MS for the transmission.

\- a shared UTRAN, the chosen PLMN identity shall be indicated to the
UTRAN in the RRC INITIAL DIRECT TRANSFER message (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

For GERAN Iu mode, network sharing is not supported.

Whenever a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message with the cause \"PLMN not
allowed\" is received by the MS, the chosen PLMN identity shall be
stored in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and if the MS is configured to use
timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then
the MS shall start timer T3245 and proceed as described in
subclause 4.1.1.6. Whenever a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is
received by the MS with the cause \"Roaming not allowed in this location
area\", \"Location Area not allowed\", or \"No suitable cells in
Location Area\", the LAI that is part of the constructed RAI which
triggered the routing area updating procedure shall be stored in the
suitable list.

In A/Gb mode, user data transmission in the MS shall be suspended during
the routing area updating procedure, except if the routing area updating
procedure is triggered by a PS handover procedure as described in
3GPP TS 43.129 \[113\]; user data reception shall be possible. User data
transmission in the network may be suspended during the routing area
updating procedure.

In Iu mode, user data transmission and reception in the MS shall not be
suspended during the routing area updating procedure. User data
transmission in the network shall not be suspended during the routing
area updating procedure.

In Iu mode, when a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST is received by the SGSN
over a new PS signalling connection while there is an ongoing PS
signalling connection (network is already in mode PMM-CONNECTED) for
this MS, the network shall progress the routing area updating procedure
as normal and release the previous PS signalling connection when the
routing area updating procedure has been accepted by the network.

NOTE 2: The re-establishment of the radio bearers of active PDP contexts
is done as described in subclause \"Service Request procedure\".

The network informs the MS about the support of specific features, such
as LCS-MOLR, MBMS, IMS voice over PS session, emergency bearer services
in Iu mode in the Network feature support information element. The
information is either explicitly given by sending the Network feature
support IE or implicitly by not sending it. The handling in the network
is described in subclause 9.4.15.11The network can also use the
Additional network feature support IE in order to inform the MS about
the support of specific features such as the delivery of SMS via GPRS
(GPRS-SMS) or implicitly by not sending it. The MS may use the support
indications for LCS-MOLR, MBMS and GPRS-SMS to inform the user about the
availability of the appropriate services. The MS shall not request the
LCS-MOLR or MBMSservices, if the service has not been indicated as
available. The indication for MBMS is defined in subclause \"MBMS
feature support indication\" in 3GPP TS 23.246 \[106\]. In an MS with
IMS voice over PS capability, the IMS voice over PS session indicator
and the emergency bearer services indicator shall be provided to the
upper layers. The upper layers take the IMS voice over PS session
indicator into account as specified in 3GPP TS 23.221 \[131\],
subclause 7.2a and subclause 7.2b, when selecting the access domain for
voice sessions or calls in Iu mode. When initiating an emergency call in
Iu mode, the upper layers also take the emergency bearer services
indicator into account for the access domain selection. The MS may use
the GPRS-SMS indication in order to obtain SMS.

#### 4.7.5.1 Normal and periodic routing area updating procedure

Periodic routing area updating is used to periodically notify the
availability of the MS to the network. The value of the update type IE
in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall indicate \"periodic
updating\". The procedure is controlled in the MS by timer T3312. When
timer T3312 expires, the periodic routing area updating procedure is
started. Start and reset of timer T3312 is described in
subclause 4.7.2.2.

The normal routing area updating procedure is initiated:

\- when the MS detects a change of the routing area in state
GMM-REGISTERED;

\- when the MS determines that GPRS resumption shall be performed;

\- when the MS needs to update the network with the new MS Radio Access
Capability IE;

\- when the MS needs to update the network with the new DRX parameter
IE;

\- in Iu mode, to re-synchronize the PMM mode of MS and network after
RRC connection release with cause \"Directed signalling connection
re-establishment\", see subclause 4.7.2.5;

\- in Iu mode, to re-synchronize the PMM mode of MS and network after
inter-system change not due to PS handover from PMM-CONNECTED mode in Iu
mode to A/Gb mode or S1 mode, if the MS performs an inter - system
change back to Iu mode without sending a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message while in A/Gb mode or a TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
while in S1 mode;

\- in Iu mode and A/Gb mode, after intersystem change from S1 mode, and
the GMM receives an indication of \"RRC connection failure\" from lower
layers due to lower layer failure while in S1 mode. In this case, if the
TIN indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\", the MS shall set the TIN to \"GUTI\"
before initiating the routing area updating procedure;

\- in A/Gb mode, after intersystem change from S1 mode if the TIN
indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\", but the MS is required to perform
routing area updating for IMS voice termination as specified in annex
P.4;

\- when the MS enters GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and the TIN
indicates \"GUTI\";

\- when the MS has selected a CSG cell whose CSG identity and associated
PLMN identity are not included in the Allowed CSG list;or in the
Operator CSG list;

\- when the MS supports SRVCC and changes the mobile station classmark
2, mobile station classmark 3 or the supported codecs;

\- when the MS changes the MS network capability information;

\- when the UE\'s usage setting or the voice domain preference for
E-UTRAN change in the MS;

\- when the MS activates mobility management for IMS voice termination
as specified in annex P.2 and the TIN indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\";

\- upon reception of a paging indication, using P-TMSI, if the timer
T3346 is running and the MS is in state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE and the RAI of the current cell is
same as the stored RAI;

\- in A/Gb mode, after intersystem change from S1 mode via cell change
order procedure not due to CS fallback, if the TIN indicates
\"RAT-related TMSI\"; in this case the MS shall set the TIN to \"GUTI\"
before initiating the routing area updating procedure;

\- in A/Gb or Iu mode in NMO I, after intersystem change from S1 mode
due to CS fallback, if the TIN indicates \"GUTI\" or if the routing area
the MS is in is different from the registered routing area;

\- in A/Gb mode, after Inter RAT handover from S1 mode or Iu mode;

\- when the MS needs to request the use of PSM or needs to stop the use
of PSM;

\- when the MS needs to request the use of eDRX or needs to stop the use
of eDRX;

\- when a change in the PSM usage conditions at the MS requires a
different timer T3312 value or different timer T3324 value;

\- when a change in the eDRX usage conditions at the MS requires
different extended DRX parameters; or

NOTE 1: A change in the PSM or eDRX usage conditions at the MS can
include e.g. a change in the MS configuration, a change in requirements
from upper layers or the battery running low at the MS.

\- when the Default\_DCN\_ID value changes, as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\].

NOTE 2: The routing area updating procedure is initiated after deleting
the DCN-ID list as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], annex C.

The ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall always be the first data
sent by the MS when a routing area border is crossed. The routing area
identification is broadcast on the broadcast channel(s).

A normal routing area updating shall abort any ongoing GMM procedure.
Aborted GMM procedures may be repeated after the normal routing area
updating procedure has been successfully performed. The value of the
update type IE included in the message shall indicate \"RA updating\".

If the normal routing area updating procedure is initiated due to the
reception of the paging indication while timer T3346 is running, the
\"follow-on request pending\" indication shall be set to 1.

##### 4.7.5.1.1 Normal and periodic routing area updating procedure initiation

To initiate the normal routing area updating procedure, the MS sends the
message ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST to the network, starts timer T3330
and changes to state GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATING-INITIATED. If timer T3302
is currently running, the MS shall stop timer T3302. If timer T3311 is
currently running, the MS shall stop timer T3311.

If the MS supports S1 mode, the MS shall handle the P-TMSI IE as
follows:

\- If the TIN indicates \"GUTI\" and the MS holds a valid GUTI, the MS
shall map the GUTI into a P-TMSI, P‑TMSI signature and RAI as specified
in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]. The MS shall include the mapped RAI in the Old
routing area identification IE and the mapped P-TMSI signature in the
P-TMSI signature IE. In addition, the MS shall include the P-TMSI type
IE with P-TMSI type set to \"mapped P-TMSI\". When the routing area
updating procedure is initiated in Iu mode, the MS shall also include
the mapped P-TMSI in the P‑TMSI IE. Additionally, in Iu mode and A/Gb
mode, if the MS holds a valid P-TMSI and RAI, the MS shall indicate the
P-TMSI in the Additional mobile identity IE and the RAI in the
Additional old routing area identification IE.

\- If the TIN indicates \"P-TMSI\" or \"RAT‑related TMSI\" and the MS
holds a valid P-TMSI and RAI, the MS shall indicate the RAI in the Old
routing area identification IE. In addition, the MS shall include the
P-TMSI type IE with P-TMSI type set to \"native P-TMSI\". When the
routing area updating procedure is initiated in Iu mode, the MS shall
also include the P-TMSI in the P‑TMSI IE.

If the MS does not support S1 mode, the MS shall include the P-TMSI type
IE with P-TMSI type set to \"native P-TMSI\".

If the MS supports PSM and requests the use of PSM, the MS shall include
the T3324 value IE with a requested timer value in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message. When the MS includes the T3324 value IE and the
MS indicates support for extended periodic timer value in the MS network
feature support IE, it may also include the T3312 extended value IE to
request a particular T3312 value to be allocated.

If the routing area updating procedure is not initiated by the MS due to
an S1 mode to Iu mode or S1 mode to A/Gb mode intersystem change, or if
it is initiated due to such an intersystem change and the TIN indicates
\"RAT‑related TMSI\", the MS shall use the existing UMTS security
context for the PS domain. The ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall
contain the P-TMSI signature when received in a previous ATTACH ACCEPT
or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message. If the MS has a valid UMTS
security context, the MS shall indicate it in the GPRS ciphering key
sequence number IE.

If the routing area updating procedure is initiated by the MS due to an
S1 mode to Iu mode or S1 mode to A/Gb mode inter-system change in idle
mode, or if it is initiated by the MS due to PS  to CS domain change
from S1 mode due to SRVCC or vSRVCC handover, and the TIN indicates
\"GUTI\", the MS shall derive a UMTS security context for the PS domain
from the current EPS security context as described in the
subclause 4.7.7.10. The ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall
include a P-TMSI signature filled with a NAS token as specified in
3GPP TS 33.401 \[123\]. Furthermore, the MS shall indicate the eKSI
value, which is associated with the derived UMTS security keys, in the
CKSN field of the GPRS GSM ciphering key sequence number IE in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.

NOTE: When the MS includes a P-TMSI signature filled with a NAS token, 8
bits of the NAS token will be filled with bits from the M‑TMSI (see
3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]).

If the routing area updating procedure is initiated by the MS due to the
S1 mode to Iu mode or S1 mode to A/Gb mode inter-system change in
connected mode, the MS shall derive a UMTS security context for the PS
domain from the current EPS security context as described in the
subclause 4.7.7.10. Furthermore, the MS shall indicate the eKSI value,
which is associated with the derived UMTS security keys, in the CKSN
field of the GPRS GSM ciphering key sequence number IE in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.

In Iu mode, if the MS wishes to prolong the established PS signalling
connection after the normal routing area updating procedure (for
example, the MS has any CM application request pending), it may set a
follow-on request pending indicator on (see subclause 4.7.13).

In order to indicate the new DRX parameter while in GERAN or UTRAN
coverage, the MS shall send the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
containing the DRX parameter in the DRX parameter IE to the network,
with the exception of the case if the MS had indicated its MS specific
DRX parameter (3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]) to the network while in E-UTRAN
coverage. In this case, when the MS enters GERAN or UTRAN coverage and
initiates a routing area updating procedure, the MS shall not include
the DRX parameter in the DRX parameter IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message.

If the MS supports eDRX and requests the use of eDRX, the MS shall
include the extended DRX parameters IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS supports the restriction on use of enhanced
coverage, then the MS shall set the Restriction on use of enhanced
coverage capability bit to \"Mobile station supports restriction on use
of enhanced coverage\" in the MS network capability IE of the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message

If the MS supports dual connectivity of E-UTRA with NR, then the MS
shall set the Dual connectivity of E-UTRA with NR capability bit to
\"Mobile station supports dual connectivity of E-UTRA with NR\" in the
MS network capability IE of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available and if the MS
indicates support of integrity protection in the MS network capability
IE included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, then the MS
shall use the current GPRS GSM Kint key and the current GPRS GSM
integrity algorithm to integrity protect the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message in the LLC layer. If LLC layer has not yet been configured, then
the GMM layer in the MS shall assign the GPRS GSM Kint key, the GPRS GSM
Kc~128~ key, the GPRS GSM integrity algorithm and the GPRS GSM ciphering
algorithm to the LLC layer, and indicates to the LLC layer that it shall
start integrity protection. This shall be done so that the LLC layer can
integrity protect, but not cipher, the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message. The MS shall include the CKSN in the CKSN IE in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. If the MS has no UMTS security context
available, then the MS shall not integrity protect the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message in the LLC layer. The MS shall in this case set
the CKSN IE to the value \"no key is available\" and send the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message unprotected.

##### 4.7.5.1.2 GMM Common procedure initiation

If the network receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message containing
the P-TMSI type IE, and the network does not follow the use of the most
significant bit of the \<LAC\> to distinguish the node type as specified
in 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\] subclause 2.8.2.2.2, the network shall use the
P-TMSI type IE to determine whether the mobile identity included in the
P-TMSI IE, if any, or the mobile identity used by the MS to derive a
foreign TLLI (see subclause 4.7.1.4.1) is a native P‑TMSI or a mapped
P‑TMSI.

The network may initiate GMM common procedures, e.g. the GMM
authentication and ciphering procedure.

##### 4.7.5.1.3 Normal and periodic routing area updating procedure accepted by the network

If the routing area updating request has been accepted by the network, a
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message shall be sent to the MS. The network
may assign a new P-TMSI and/or a new P-TMSI signature for the MS. If a
new P-TMSI and/or P-TMSI signature have been assigned to the MS, it/they
shall be included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message together
with the routing area identification.

In a shared network, if the MS is a network sharing supporting MS, the
network shall indicate the PLMN identity of the CN operator that has
accepted the routing area updating request in the RAI contained in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message; if the MS is a network sharing
non-supporting MS, the network shall indicate the PLMN identity of the
common PLMN (see 3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]). If the PLMN identity of the
common PLMN included in the RAI does not identify the CN operator that
has accepted the routing area updating request, the network may include
the PLMN identity of the CN operator that has accepted the routing area
updating request in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

In a multi-operator core network (MOCN) with common GERAN, the network
shall indicate in the RAI the common PLMN identity (see
3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]). If the common PLMN identity included in the RAI
does not identify the CN operator that has accepted the routing area
updating request, the network may include the PLMN identity of the CN
operator that has accepted the routing area updating request in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the
MS network capability IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and
if the network supports integrity protection, then the network shall
store all octets received from the MS in the MS network capability IE
and in the MS Radio Access Capability IE, up to the maximum length
defined for the respective information element.

NOTE 1: The network needs to store the MS network capability and MS
Radio Access Capability exactly as received from the MS and network is
not allowed to ignore the \"higher\" octets sent by the MS even if the
network does not support any features indicated in the higher octetst.
Otherwise the replay check of the MS network capability and MS Radio
Access Capability will fail in the MS.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available in the network and
if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection,
and if integrity protection of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
is successfully verified in the LLC layer in the network, then if the
network decides to re-authenticate the MS or select a new integrity
algorithm or ciphering algorithm, the network shall initiate an
authentication and ciphering procedure.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available in the network and
if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection if
integrity protection of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message is
successfully verified in the LLC layer in the network, the network may
decide to continue using the stored GPRS GSM Kint integrity key, GPRS
GSM Kc~128~ encryption key, GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm and GPRS GSM
integrity algorithm in the LLC layer without initiating an
authentication and ciphering procedure. If the MS and network continue
to use the same ciphering mode, ciphering or no ciphering, the ciphering
mode is re-established without the need to run an authentication and
ciphering procedure. The network shall replay the MS network capability
IE and the MS radio access capability IE received from the MS in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, by including the MS network
capability IE and the MS radio access capability IE in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT message to the MS. The GMM layer in the network shall
assign the stored GPRS GSM Kint key, the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ key, the GPRS
GSM integrity algorithm and the GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm to the LLC
layer. The MS shall then indicate to the LLC layer that it shall start
integrity protection and ciphering in the LLC layer before sending the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message to the MS. If the integrity
protection of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message is not
successfully verified in the LLC layer or if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message is received without integrity protection, then the
network shall progress the routing area updating procedure and initiate
an authentication and ciphering procedure to authenticate the MS and
activate integrity protection and ciphering in the MS.

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available in the network and
if the MS indicates support of integrity protection in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection,
and if the network is not able to verify the message authentication code
in the LLC layer protecting the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, due
to the LLC layer at the network not having been configured yet with the
integrity key and integrity algorithm for this MS, then the network
shall progress the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message at GMM layer
anyway. If the CKSN included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
belongs to an UMTS security context available in the network, then the
network may re-establish integrity protection and ciphering of layer 3
signalling messages in the LLC layer without initiating an
authentication and ciphering procedure.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS indicates support of integrity protection of
user plane data in the MS network capability IE in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REQUEST message, and if the network supports and accepts
integrity protection of user plane data, then the network shall indicate
integrity protection of user plane data to the MS in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT message. The MS shall indicate to the LLC layer to start
integrity protection of user plane data after the reception of the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, if indicated. The same GPRS GSM Kint
key and the same GPRS GSM integrity algorithm used for integrity
protection of layer 3 signalling messages shall be used for integrity
protection of user plane data in the LLC layer. The network shall
indicate to the LLC layer to start integrity protection of user plane
data after sending the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message to the MS. If
the network does not indicate to the MS in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT message that it accepts the use of integrity protection of user
plane data, and if the MS does not accept such a network, then the MS
shall detach from the network.

If a new DRX parameter was included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message, the network shall store the new DRX parameter and use it for
the downlink transfer of signalling and user data.

The network shall include the extended DRX parameters IE in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message only if the extended DRX parameters IE was
included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and the network
supports and accepts the use of eDRX.

If the MS has indicated in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message that
it supports PS inter-RAT handover from GERAN to UTRAN Iu mode, the
network may include in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message a request
to provide the Inter RAT information container.

If the MS has included the MS network capability IE or the UE network
capability IE or both in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, the
network shall store all octets received from the MS, up to the maximum
length defined for the respective information element. In case the UE
network capability IE indicated new information to the network, the MS
shall set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\".

NOTE 2: This information is forwarded to the new SGSN during inter-SGSN
handover or to the new MME during intersystem handover to S1 mode.

In A/Gb mode the Cell Notification information element shall be included
in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message in order to indicate the
ability of the network to support the Cell Notification.

The network shall change to state GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED and
shall start the supervision timer T3350 as described in subclause 4.7.6.

If the LAI or PLMN identity contained in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message is a member of any of the \"forbidden\" lists and the MS is not
attached for emergency bearer services, then any such entry shall be
deleted.

In Iu mode, the network should prolong the PS signalling connection if
the mobile station has indicated a follow-on request pending in ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST. The network may also prolong the PS signalling
connection without any indication from the mobile terminal (for example,
if user plane radio access bearers have been established for the MS).

If the PDP context status information element is included in ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, then the network shall deactivate all those
PDP contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between the MS and
the network), which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE on network side but
are indicated by the MS as being in state PDP-INACTIVE.

If the MBMS context status information element is included in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, then the network shall deactivate
all those MBMS contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between
the MS and network) which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE on the
network side, but are indicated by the MS as being in state
PDP-INACTIVE. If no MBMS context status information element is included,
then the network shall deactivate all MBMS contexts locally which are
not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE on the network side.

If a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message is received from an MS with a
LIPA PDN connection, and if:

\- a L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided by the lower layer
together with the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and the GGSN
address associated with the PDP context of the LIPA PDN connection is
different from the provided L-GW Transport Layer Address (see
3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- no L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided together with the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message by the lower layer,

then the SGSN locally deactivates all PDP contexts associated with the
LIPA PDN connection. If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST request message
is accepted, the SGSN informs the MS via the PDP context status IE in
the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message that PDP contexts were locally
deactivated.

If a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message is received from an MS with a
SIPTO at the local network PDN connection, the following different cases
can be distinguished:

1\) If the PDN connection is a SIPTO at the local network PDN connection
with collocated L-GW and if:

\- a SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided by the lower layer
together with the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and the GGSN
address associated with the PDP context of the SIPTO at the local
network PDN connection is different from the provided SIPTO L-GW
Transport Layer Address (see 3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- no SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided together with the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message by the lower layer,

2\) If the PDN connection is a SIPTO at the local network PDN connection
with stand-alone GW and if:

\- a LHN-ID value is provided by the lower layer together with the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and the LHN-ID stored in the PDP
context of the SIPTO at the local network PDN connection is different
from the provided LHN-ID value (see 3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- no LHN-ID value is provided together with the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message by the lower layer,

then the SGSN locally deactivates all PDP contexts associated with the
SIPTO at the local network PDN connection. If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST request message is accepted, the SGSN informs the MS via the PDP
context status IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message that PDP
contexts were locally deactivated.

For a SIPTO at the local network PDN connection with stand-alone GW, the
conditions to deactivate ISR are specified in 3GPP TS 23.401 \[122\],
subclause 4.3.5.6.

If due to regional subscription restrictions or access restrictions the
MS is not allowed to access the routing area, but the MS has a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services established, the network may
accept the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message and deactivate all
non-emergency PDP contexts by initiating an PDP context deactivation
procedure when the routing area updating procedure is initiated in
PMM-CONNECTED mode. When the routing area updating procedure is
initiated in PMM-IDLE mode, the network locally deactivates all
non-emergency PDP contexts and informs the MS via the PDP context status
IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message. The network shall not
deactivate the PDP contexts for emergency bearer services. The network
shall consider the MS to be attached for emergency bearer services only.

If the network supports delivery of SMS via GPRS (see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]) and this delivery is enabled (see
3GPP TS 29.272 \[150\]), then the network shall include the Additional
network feature support IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message and
set the GPRS-SMS indicator.

If the network supports the extended protocol configuration options IE
and the MS indicated support of the extended protocol configuration
options IE, then the network shall include the Additional network
feature support IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message and set the
ePCO IE indicator to \"extended protocol configuration options IE
supported\".

The network shall indicate \"combined RA/LA updated\" or \"combined
RA/LA updated and ISR activated\" in the update result IE in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, if the following conditions apply:

\- the update type IE included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message indicates \"periodic updating\" and the MS was previously
successfully attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services; and

\- location area updating for non-GPRS services as specified in
3GPP TS 29.018 \[149\] is successful.

The network shall include the T3324 value IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT message only if the T3324 value IE was included in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and the network supports and accepts the
use of PSM.

If the network supports and accepts the use of PSM, and the MS included
the T3312 extended value IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message,
then the network shall take into account the T3312 value requested when
providing the Periodic RA update timer IE and the T3312 extended value
IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

NOTE 3: Besides the value requested by the MS, the network can take
local configuration into account when selecting a value for T3312 (see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\] subclause 5.3.13.54).

In A/Gb mode, if the MS indicates support for restriction on use of
enhanced coverage in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, and the
network restricts enhanced coverage for the MS, then the network shall
set the RestrictEC bit to \"Enhanced coverage restricted\" in the
Additional network feature support IE of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message.

If the network includes the T3324 value IE indicating a value other than
deactivated in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the network shall
indicate in the Update result IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message that ISR is not activated.

Upon receipt of a ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the MS shall store
the received routing area identification, stops timer T3330, reset the
routing area updating attempt counter, reset the service request attempt
counter and set the GPRS update status to GU1 UPDATED. If the message
contains a P-TMSI, the MS shall use this P-TMSI as new temporary
identity for GPRS services and shall store the new P-TMSI. If no P-TMSI
was included by the network in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message,
the old P-TMSI shall be kept. Furthermore, the MS shall store the P-TMSI
signature if received in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message. If no
P-TMSI signature was included in the message, the old P-TMSI signature,
if available, shall be deleted.

Upon receipt of a ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message with update result
IE indicating \"combined RA/LA updated\" or \"combined RA/LA updated and
ISR activated\" during the periodic routing area updating procedure, the
MS shall behave as follows:

\- if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains an IMSI, the MS is
not allocated any TMSI. The MS shall delete any old TMSI accordingly;

\- if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains a TMSI, the MS
shall use this TMSI as new temporary identity. The MS shall delete its
old TMSI and shall store the new TMSI. In this case, a ROUTING AREA
UPDATE COMPLETE message is returned to the network to confirm the
received TMSI; or

\- if neither a TMSI nor an IMSI has been included by the network in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the old TMSI, if any is available,
shall be kept.

Upon receiving a ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message, the SGSN shall
stop timer T3350 and change to state GMM-REGISTERED. The P-TMSI, if sent
in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, shall be considered as valid.

NOTE 4: Upon receiving a ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message, if a new
TMSI is included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the SGSN
sends a BSSAP+-TMSI-REALLOCATION-COMPLETE message as specified in
3GPP TS 29.018 \[149\].

If the PDP context status information element is included in ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, then the MS shall deactivate all those PDP
contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between the MS and
network), which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE in the MS but are
indicated by the network as being in state PDP-INACTIVE. If there is a
default PDP context among the PDP contexts to be deactivated, an MS
supporting S1 mode shall locally deactivate all PDP contexts associated
to the same PDP address and APN as the default PDP context without
peer-to-peer SM signalling to the network; an MS not supporting S1 mode
may apply the same behaviour. If only the PDN connection for emergency
bearer services remains established, the MS shall consider itself
attached for emergency bearer services only.

If the MBMS context status information element is included in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, then the MS shall deactivate all
those MBMS contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between the
MS and network) which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE in the MS, but
are indicated by the network as being in state PDP-INACTIVE. If no MBMS
context status information element is included, then the MS shall
deactivate all those MBMS contexts locally which are not in SM state
PDP-INACTIVE in the MS.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains the T3312 extended
value IE, then the MS shall use the T3312 extended value IE as periodic
routing area update timer (T3312). If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message does not contain the T3312 extended value IE, then the MS shall
use value in the Periodic RA update timer IE as periodic routing area
update timer (T3312).

If the MS receives the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message from a PLMN
for which a PLMN-specific attempt counter or PLMN-specific PS-attempt
counter is maintained (see subclause 4.1.1.6A), then the MS shall reset
these counters. If the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall reset this counter.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains the T3324 value IE,
then the MS shall use the timer value for T3324 as specified in
subclause 4.7.2.8.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains the DCN-ID IE, then
the MS shall store the included DCN-ID value together with the PLMN code
of the registered PLMN in a DCN-ID list in a non-volatile memory in the
ME as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], annex C.

In a shared network or in a multi-operator core network (MOCN) with
common GERAN, if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains the
DCN-ID IE and the PLMN identity of the CN operator IE, the MS shall
store the included DCN-ID value with the PLMN identity indicated in the
PLMN identity of the CN operator IE, and the included DCN-ID value with
the PLMN identity indicated in the RAI in a DCN-ID list in a
non-volatile memory in the ME as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\],
annex C.

In A/Gb mode, if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains the
Cell Notification information element, then the MS shall start to use
the LLC NULL frame to perform cell updates.

If the MS has initiated the routing area updating procedure due to
manual CSG selection and receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message,
and the MS sent the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message in a CSG cell,
the MS shall check if the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the
cell are contained in the Allowed CSG list. If not, the MS shall add
that CSG ID and associated PLMN identity to the Allowed CSG list and the
MS may add the HNB Name (if provided by lower layers) to the Allowed CSG
list if the HNB Name is present in neither the Operator CSG list nor the
Allowed CSG list.

The network may also send a list of \"equivalent PLMNs\" in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message. Each entry of the list contains a PLMN code
(MCC+MNC). If the routing area updating procedure is initiated during a
CS fallback procedure and the network is configured to support the
return to the last registered E-UTRAN PLMN after CS fallback as
specified in 3GPP TS 23.272 \[133\], and the PLMN identity which is
provided as part of the RAI contained in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message differs from the last registered E-UTRAN PLMN identity, the
network shall include the last registered E-UTRAN PLMN identity in the
list of \"equivalent PLMNs\" in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

NOTE 5: The network can determine a routing area updating procedure is
initiated during a CS fallback procedure as specified in
3GPP TS 23.272 \[133\].

NOTE 6: The last registered E-UTRAN PLMN identity can be derived by the
network as specified in 3GPP TS 23.272 \[133\].

The mobile station shall store the list, as provided by the network, and
further handle the list as follows:

\- if there is no PDN connection for emergency bearers established, the
mobile station shall remove from the list of \"equivalent PLMNs\" any
PLMN code that is already in the \"forbidden PLMN\" list. If the mobile
station is operating in MS operation mode C or the mobile station is
supporting S1 mode, it shall also remove any PLMN code that is already
in the list of \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS service\";

\- if the MS is not attached for emergency bearer services and there is
a PDN connection for emergency bearer services established, the MS shall
remove from the list of \"equivalent PLMNs\" any PLMN code present in
the \"forbidden PLMN\" list when the PDN connection for emergency bearer
services is released. If the mobile station is operating in MS operation
mode C or the mobile station is supporting S1 mode, it shall also remove
any PLMN code present in the list of \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" when the PDN connection for emergency bearer services is
released; and

\- in addition, for all cases the mobile station shall add to the stored
list the PLMN code of the registered PLMN that sent the list.

All PLMNs in the stored list shall be regarded as equivalent to each
other for PLMN selection, cell selection/re-selection and handover. The
stored list in the mobile station shall be replaced on each occurrence
of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message. If no list is contained in
the message, then the stored list in the mobile station shall be
deleted. An MS attached for emergency bearer services only shall delete
the stored list when the MS enters the state GMM-DEREGISTERED. The list
shall be stored in the mobile station while switched off so that it can
be used for PLMN selection after switch on.

A ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message shall be returned to the network
if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contained any of:

\- a P-TMSI;

\- a TMSI;

\- receive N‑PDU Numbers (see 3GPP TS 44.065 \[78\] and
3GPP TS 25.322 \[19b\]); or

\- a request for the provision of Inter RAT handover information.

If Receive N‑PDU Numbers were included, the Receive N‑PDU Numbers values
valid in the MS, shall be included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE
message.

If the network has requested the provision of Inter RAT handover
information, the MS shall return a ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message
including the Inter RAT handover information IE to the network.

NOTE 7: In Iu mode, after a routing area updating procedure, the mobile
station can initiate Service Request procedure to request the resource
reservation for the active PDP contexts if the resources have been
released by the network or send upper layer message (e.g. ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST) to the network via the existing PS signalling
connection.

In Iu mode, if the network wishes to prolong the PS signalling
connection (for example, if the mobile station has indicated \"follow-on
request pending\" in ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message or if user
plane radio access bearers have been established for the MS) the network
shall indicate the \"follow-on proceed\" in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT message. If the network wishes to release the PS signalling
connection, the network shall indicate \"no follow-on proceed\" in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

After that in Iu mode, the mobile station shall act according to the
follow-on proceed flag included in the Update result information element
in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message (see subclause 4.7.13).

The network may also send a Local Emergency Numbers List with local
emergency numbers in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT, by including the
Emergency Number List IE. The mobile equipment shall store the Local
Emergency Numbers List, as provided by the network. The Local Emergency
Numbers List stored in the mobile equipment shall be replaced on each
receipt of the Emergency Number List IE. The received Local Emergency
Numbers List shall be provided to the upper layers.

The emergency number(s) received in the Emergency Number List IE are
valid only in networks in the same country as the cell on which this IE
is received. If no list is contained in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message, then the stored Local Emergency Numbers List in the mobile
equipment shall be kept, except if the mobile equipment has successfully
registered to a PLMN in a country different from that of the PLMN that
sent the Local Emergency Numbers List.

The mobile equipment shall use the stored Local Emergency Numbers List
of emergency numbers received from the network in addition to the
emergency numbers stored on the SIM/USIM or ME to detect that the number
dialled is an emergency number.

NOTE 8: The mobile equipment may use the Local Emergency Numbers List to
assist the end user in determining whether the dialled number is
intended for an emergency service or for another destination, e.g. a
local directory service. The possible interactions with the end user are
implementation specific.

NOTE 9: An MS that supports procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.302 \[156\], can get additional local emergency numbers
through those procedures, which can be used based on operator policy
(see 3GPP TS 24.302 \[156\]) to detect that the number dialled is an
emergency number.

The Local Emergency Numbers List shall be deleted at switch off and
removal of the SIM/USIM. The mobile equipment shall be able to store up
to ten local emergency numbers received from the network.

In order to indicate to the MS that the GUTI and TAI list assigned to
the MS remain registered with the network and are valid in the MS, the
network shall indicate in the Update result IE in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT message that ISR is activated.

If the MS is attached for emergency bearer services or if the network
has deactivated all non-emergency PDP contexts, the network shall
indicate in the update result IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message that ISR is not activated.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains:

i\) no indication that ISR is activated, an MS supporting S1 mode shall
set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\" and shall stop the periodic tracking area
update timer T3412 or T3423, if running; or

ii\) an indication that ISR is activated, then:

\- if the MS is required to perform tracking area updating for IMS voice
termination as specified in annex P.5, the MS shall set the TIN to
\"P-TMSI\" and shall stop the periodic tracking area update timer T3412
or T3423, if running;

\- if the MS had initiated the routing area updating procedure due to a
change in DRX parameters, the MS shall set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\" and
shall stop the periodic tracking area update timer T3412 or T3423 if
running;

\- if the MS had initiated the routing area updating procedure due to a
change in the UE\'s usage setting or the voice domain preference for
E-UTRAN, the MS shall set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\" and shall stop the
periodic tracking area update timer T3412 or T3423, if running; or

\- the MS shall regard the available GUTI and TAI list as valid and
registered with the network. If the TIN currently indicates \"GUTI\" and
the periodic tracking area update timer T3412 is running or is
deactivated, the MS shall set the TIN to \"RAT-related TMSI\". If the
TIN currently indicates \"GUTI\" and the periodic tracking area update
timer T3412 has already expired, the MS shall set the TIN to \"P-TMSI\".

In A/Gb mode, if a UMTS security context is available, if the MS
indicates support of integrity protection in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message and the network supports integrity protection, then if
the MS receives replayed capability IE's in ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message, then the MS shall check if the replayed MS network capability
IE and the replayed MS Radio Access Capability IE received in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message has not been altered compared to the
MS network capability IE and the MS Radio Access Capability IE that the
MS sent to the network in ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. If the
replayed MS network capability IE and the replayed MS Radio Access
Capability IE are not the same, then the MS shall ignore the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

##### 4.7.5.1.4 Normal and periodic routing area updating procedure not accepted by the network

If the routing area updating cannot be accepted, the network sends a
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message to the MS. An MS, which receives a
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message with a reject cause other than GMM
cause value \#25 or the message is integrity protected, shall stop the
timer T3330. If a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message containing a reject
cause other than GMM cause value \#25 is received or the message is
integrity protected, the MS shall stop any ongoing transmission of user
data.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message containing GMM cause value
cause \#25 was received without integrity protection, then the MS shall
discard the message.

If the routing area update request is rejected due to general NAS level
mobility management congestion control, the network shall set the GMM
cause value to \#22 \"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3346.

The MS shall then take different actions depending on the received
reject cause value:

\# 3 (Illegal MS);

\# 6 (Illegal ME);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The MS shall consider the SIM/USIM as invalid for GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services\", then
the MS shall set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum
value. The MS shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, and shall enter
the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall in addition set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall abort the RR
connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The SIM/USIM shall be
considered as invalid also for non-GPRS services until switching off or
the SIM/USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in
subclause 4.1.1.6. If the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM
considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this
counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM
cause with the same value.

NOTE 1: The possibility to configure a MS so that the radio transceiver
for a specific radio access technology is not active, although it is
implemented in the MS, is out of scope of the present specification.

\# 7 (GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2.9) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The MS shall enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED. If the message has been successfully integrity checked
by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM
considered invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this
counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

If the update type is \"periodic updating\", a GPRS MS operating in MS
operation mode A or B in network operation mode I shall then proceed
with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

NOTE 2: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM
cause with the same value.

\# 8 (GPRS services and non-GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The MS shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, and shall enter the
GMM state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall
delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is
operating in MS operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS
shall abort the RR connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The
SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS and non-GPRS services
until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services\", then
the MS shall set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum
value. If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the
lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered
invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to
MS implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE 3: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the tracking area procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 9 (MS identity cannot be derived by the network);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED (and shall
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED, and shall delete any P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and
GPRS ciphering key sequence number.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

If the rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services, then

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A in network operation mode
I shall proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures. Additionally,
the MS shall initiate a normal or combined GPRS attach procedure
depending on whether it is in an ongoing circuit-switched transaction.
If the MS is in an ongoing circuit-switched transaction, it shall
initiate the appropriate MM specific procedure after the
circuit-switched transaction has been released. The MM sublayer shall
act as in network operation mode II as long as the combined GMM
procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered;

\- if the update type is \"periodic updating\", a GPRS MS operating in
MS operation mode B in network operation mode I shall proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedures. Additionally, the MS shall initiate
a combined GPRS attach procedure. The MM sublayer shall act as in
network operation mode II as long as the combined GMM procedures are not
successful and no new RA is entered;

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode II which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, and which did not perform a successful generic location
updating procedure since the last intersystem change from S1 mode to
A/Gb or Iu mode shall proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures.
Additionally, a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network
operation mode II shall initiate a GPRS attach procedure; and

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode II which is not configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or
SMS over SGs only, and a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode C may
subsequently, automatically initiate the GPRS attach procedure.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM
cause with the same value.

\# 10 (Implicitly detached);

If the update type is \"periodic updating\", a GPRS MS operating in MS
operation mode B in network operation mode I, is IMSI detached for both
GPRS and CS services in the network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A in network operation mode I
is detached for GPRS services. If no RR connection exists then the MS is
also IMSI detached for the CS services.

The MS shall enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. If the
rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services, then

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode II which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, and which did not perform a successful generic location
updating procedure since the last intersystem change from S1 mode to
A/Gb or Iu mode shall proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures;

\- regardless of the MS operation mode and the network operation mode,
the MS shall then perform a new attach procedure. The MS should also
activate PDP context(s) that were originally activated by the MS to
replace any previously MS activated PDP context(s). The MS should also
perform the procedures needed in order to activate any previously active
multicast service(s); and

\- additionally, a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A in network
operation mode I which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over
SGs, or SMS over SGs only, and which is in an ongoing circuit-switched
transaction shall initiate the appropriate MM specific procedure after
the circuit-switched transaction has been released. The MM sublayer
shall act as in network operation mode II as long as the combined GMM
procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM state as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the tracking area
update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

NOTE 4: In some cases, user interaction may be required and then the MS
cannot activate the PDP and MBMS context(s) automatically.

\# 11 (PLMN not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset
the routing area updating attempt counter, shall delete the list of
equivalent PLMNs, and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and
if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\]
or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall start timer T3245 and
proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the tracking area
update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 12 (Location area not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2), shall reset
the routing area updating attempt counter and shall change to state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for regional provision of service\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a cell selection according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 5: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the tracking area
update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 13 (Roaming not allowed in this location area);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete the list of
equivalent PLMNs. The MS shall reset the routing area updating attempt
counter, and shall enter the state GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location update attempt counter.
The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122
\[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see 3GPP TS 44.318
\[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with
the same value.

\# 14 (GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status
to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to
subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset the routing area updating attempt
counter and shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" list and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. A GPRS
MS operating in MS operation mode C shall perform a PLMN selection
instead of a cell selection. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a
PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

If the update type is \"periodic updating\" a GPRS MS operating in MS
operation mode A or B in network operation mode I shall then proceed
with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

As an implementation option, a GPRS MS operating in operation mode A or
B may perform the following additional action. If no RR connection
exists the MS may perform the action immediately. If the MS is operating
in MS operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS may only
perform the action when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- The MS may perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If an MS in GAN mode performs a PLMN selection, it shall request a PLMN
list in GAN (see 3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN
selection from this list according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

The MS shall not perform the optional PLMN selection in the case where
the PLMN providing this reject cause is:

\- On the \"User Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology \" or,

\- On the \"Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology \"
list or,

\- A PLMN identified as equivalent to any PLMN, within the same country,
contained in the lists above.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the tracking area
update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 15 (No Suitable Cells In Location Area);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) shall reset the routing
area updating attempt counter and shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location update attempt counter.
The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or a
tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and
3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

NOTE 6: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with
the same value.

\#22 (Congestion);

If the T3346 value IE is present in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT
message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor
deactivated, the MS shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall
be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the MS for this
case is specified in subclause 4.7.5.1.5.

The MS shall abort the routing area updating procedure, reset the
routing area updating attempt counter and set the GPRS update status to
GU2 NOT UPDATED. If the rejected request was not for initiating a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services, the MS shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE.

The MS shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is integrity protected, the MS
shall start timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is not integrity protected,
the MS shall start timer T3346 with a random value from the default
range specified in table 11.3a.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process. The routing area updating procedure is started, if
still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with
the same value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode II which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, and which did not perform a successful generic location
updating procedure since the last intersystem change from S1 mode to
A/Gb or Iu mode shall proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures.

\# 25 (Not authorized for this CSG)

Cause \#25 is only applicable in UTRAN Iu mode and when received from a
CSG cell. Other cases are considered as abnormal cases and the
specification of the mobile station behaviour is given in
subclause 4.7.5.1.5.

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset the routing
area updating attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message are contained in the
Allowed CSG list stored in the MS, the MS shall remove the entry
corresponding to this CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the
Allowed CSG list.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message are contained in the
Operator CSG list, the MS shall proceed as specified in
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location update attempt counter.
The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with
the same value.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The specification of the
MS behaviour in those cases is described in subclause 4.7.5.1.5.

##### 4.7.5.1.4a Routing area updating procedure for initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services not accepted by the network (UTRAN Iu mode only)

If the routing area updating request for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services cannot be accepted by the network, the MS
shall perform the procedures as described in subclause 4.7.5.1.4. Then
if the MS is in the same selected PLMN where the last routing area
updating was attempted, the MS shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 1: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

b\) detach locally, if not detached already, attempt GPRS attach for
emergency bearer services.

If the routing area updating request for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services fails due to abnormal case a) in
subclause 4.7.5.1.5, the MS shall perform the procedures as described in
subclause 4.7.5.1.5 and inform the upper layers of the failure to access
the network.

NOTE 2: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the routing area updating request for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services fails due to abnormal cases b), c) or d) in
subclause 4.7.5.1.5, the MS shall perform the procedures as described in
subclause 4.7.5.1.5. Then if the MS is in the same selected PLMN where
the last routing area updating was attempted, the MS shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 3: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

b\) detach locally, if not detached already, attempt GPRS attach for
emergency bearer services.

##### 4.7.5.1.5 Abnormal cases in the MS

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Access barred because of access class control, EAB or ACDC

 If the routing area updating procedure is started in response to a
paging request from the network, access class barring, EAB or ACDC is
not applicable.

The routing area updating procedure shall not be started. The MS stays
in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell reselection
process. The procedure is started as soon as possible and if still
necessary, i.e. when the barred state is removed or because of a cell
change.

If access is barred because of access class control, the upper layers
request PS signalling connection, ACDC is applicable to the request and
the MS supports ACDC, then the routing area updating procedure shall be
started according to subclause 4.7.5.1.1.

If access is barred for a certain ACDC category, and if the upper layers
request PS signalling connection for a higher ACDC category and the MS
supports ACDC, then the routing area updating procedure shall be started
according to subclause 4.7.5.1.1.

If an access request for an uncategorized application is barred due to
ACDC , and if the upper layers request PS signalling connection for a
certain ACDC category and the MS supports ACDC, then the routing area
updating procedure shall be started according to subclause 4.7.5.1.1.

b\) Lower layer failure without \"Extended Wait Time\" received from
lower layers before the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA
UPDATE REJECT message is received

The procedure shall be aborted and the MS shall proceed as described
below, except in the following implementation option cases b.1 and b.2.

b.1) Release of PS signalling connection before the completion of the
routing area updating procedure

The routing area updating procedure shall be initiated again, if the
following conditions apply:

i\) The original routing area update procedure was initiated over an
existing PS signalling connection; and

ii\) The routing area update procedure was not due to timer T3330 expiry;
and

iii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection were (e.g. PS
authentication procedure, see subclause 4.7.7) received after the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message was transmitted.

b.2) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with, for
example, cause \"Normal\", or \"User inactivity\" or \"Direct signalling
connection re-establishment\" (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The routing area updating procedure shall be initiated again, if the
following conditions apply:

i\) The original routing area update procedure was initiated over an
existing RRC connection; and

ii\) The routing area update procedure was not due to timer T3330 expiry;
and

iii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection (e.g. PS
authentication procedure, see subclause 4.7.7) were received after the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message was transmitted.

NOTE 1: The RRC connection release cause that triggers the re-initiation
of the routing area update procedure is implementation specific.

c\) T3330 time-out

The procedure is restarted four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer
T3330, the MS shall abort the procedure and, in Iu mode, release the PS
signalling connection (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]). The MS shall proceed
as described below.

d\) ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT, other causes than those treated in
subclause 4.7.5.1.4, and cases of GMM cause values \#22 and \#25, if
considered as abnormal cases according to subclause 4.7.5.1.4

If the routing area updating request is not for initiating a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services, upon reception of the cause
codes \# 95, \# 96, \# 97, \# 99 and \# 111 the MS should set the
routing area updating attempt counter to 5.

The MS shall proceed as described below.

e\) If a routing area border is crossed, when the MS is in state
GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATE-INITIATED, the routing area updating procedure
shall be aborted and re-initiated immediately. The MS shall set the GPRS
update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED.

f\) In A/Gb mode, if a cell change occurs within the same RA, when the MS
is in state GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATE-INITIATED, the cell update procedure
is performed, before completion of the routing area updating procedure.

g\) Routing area updating and detach procedure collision

GPRS detach containing detach type \"re-attach required\" or \"re-attach
not required\":

If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the routing area
updating procedure has been completed, the routing area updating
procedure shall be aborted and the GPRS detach procedure shall be
progressed. If the DETACH REQUEST message contains detach type
\"re-attach not required\" and GMM cause \#2 \"IMSI unknown in HLR\",
the MS will follow the procedure as described below for the detach type
\"IMSI detach\".

GPRS detach containing detach type \"IMSI detach\":

If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the routing area
updating procedure has been completed, the routing area updating
procedure shall be progressed, i.e. the DETACH REQUEST message shall be
ignored.

The MS shall proceed as described below.

h\) Routing area updating and P-TMSI reallocation procedure collision

If the MS receives a P-TMSI REALLOCATION C0MMAND message before the
routing area updating procedure has been completed, the P-TMSI
reallocation procedure shall be aborted and the routing area updating
procedure shall be progressed.

i\) \"Extended wait time\" for PS domain from the lower layers

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message contained the low priority
indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\",
the MS shall start timer T3346 with the \"Extended wait time\" value and
reset the routing area updating attempt counter.

In other cases the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

The MS shall abort the routing area updating procedure, stay in the
current serving cell, set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED,
change the state to GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE and apply the
normal cell reselection process.

If the MS had used eDRX before initiating routing area updating
procedure, then the MS shall continue to use the eDRX with the extended
DRX parameters IE received during the last attach or routing area
updating procedure.

The MS shall proceed as described below.

j\) Timer T3346 is running

The MS shall not start the routing area updating procedure unless:

\- the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN;

\- the MS is in PMM-CONNECTED mode (Iu mode);

\- the MS receives a paging;

\- the MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services
established;

\- the MS is establishing a PDN connection for emergency bearer
services; or

\- the MS has a PDN connection established without the NAS signalling
low priority indication or is establishing a PDN connection without the
NAS signalling low priority indication and if the timer T3346 was
started due to rejection of a NAS request message (e.g. ATTACH REQUEST,
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST) which contained the low
priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\".

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process.

NOTE 2: It is considered an abnormal case if the MS needs to initiate an
routing area updating procedure while timer T3346 is running independent
on whether timer T3346 was started due to an abnormal case or a non
successful case.

If the stored RAI is different to the RAI of the current serving cell or
the TIN indicates \"GUTI\", the MS shall set the GPRS update status to
GU2 NOT UPDATED and change to state GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE.

The MS shall proceed as described below.

k\) Mobile originated detach required

GPRS detach due to removal of the USIM or due to switch off:

If the MS is in the state GMM-ROUTING-AREA-UPDATE-INITIATED, the routing
area updating procedure shall be aborted and the GPRS detach procedure
shall be performed (see subclause 4.7.4.1).

GPRS detach not due to removal of the USIM and not due to switch off:

The MS shall initiate the MS initiated detach procedure after successful
completion of the routing area updating procedure.

l\) Routing area updating and paging for non-GPRS services procedure
collision

If a GPRS MS in MS operation mode B receives a paging for non-GPRS
services before the normal or periodic routing area updating procedure
has been completed, the MS shall progress the routing area updating
procedure and respond to the paging for non-GPRS services when it has
completed the routing area updating procedure or aborted the procedure
for other reasons.

In cases b, c, d, e, g with detach type \"re-attach required\" or
\"re-attach not required\" with GMM cause other than \#2 \"IMSI unknown
in HLR\", and i, the MS shall stop any ongoing transmission of user
data.

In cases b, c, d, i and j the MS shall proceed as follows:

Timer T3330 shall be stopped if still running.

For the cases b, c, d, and i when the \"Extended wait time\" is ignored,
if the routing area updating request is not for initiating a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services, the routing area updating
attempt counter shall be incremented.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is less than 5, and the
stored RAI is equal to the RAI of the current serving cell and the GPRS
update status is equal to GU1 UPDATED and the TIN does not indicate
\"GUTI\":

\- the MS shall keep the GPRS update status to GU1 UPDATED and changes
state to GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The MS shall start timer T3311.

\- If in addition the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message indicated
\"periodic updating\", none of the other reasons for initiating the
routing area updating procedure listed in subclause 4.7.5.1 was
applicable, and the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message did not include
a Requested READY timer value IE, T3324 value IE, T3312 extended value
IE or Extended DRX parameters IE,

\- in Iu mode, the timer T3311 may be stopped when the MS enters
PMM-CONNECTED mode;

\- in A/Gb mode, the timer T3311 may be stopped when the READY timer is
started.

\- If timer T3311 expires the routing area updating procedure is
triggered again.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is less than 5, and the
stored RAI is different to the RAI of the current serving cell or the
GPRS update status is different to GU1 UPDATED or the TIN indicates
\"GUTI\":

\- for the cases i and j, the routing area updating procedure is
started, if still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

\- for the cases b, c, d, and i when the \"Extended wait time\" is
ignored, if the routing area updating request is not for initiating a
PDN connection for emergency bearer services, the MS shall start timer
T3311, shall set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED and changes
state to GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE.

\- If S1 mode is supported by the MS, the MS shall in addition handle
the EPS update status as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
abnormal case when a normal or periodic tracking area updating procedure
fails and the tracking area updating attempt counter is less than 5 and
the EPS update status is different from EU1 UPDATED.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is greater than or equal to
5:

\- the MS shall start timer T3302, and shall set the GPRS update status
to GU2 NOT UPDATED. An MS which is a GPRS MS in MS operation modes C
shall also delete the list of equivalent PLMNs. The MS shall also enter
the state GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE or optionally the
GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH state (see subclause 4.2.5.1.8) in order to
perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

\- If S1 mode is supported by the MS, the MS shall in addition handle
the EPS update status as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
abnormal case when a normal or periodic tracking area updating procedure
fails and the tracking area updating attempt counter is equal to 5.

\- If the MS does not enter the state GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH, then

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A in network operation mode
I shall proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures. If the MS
operating in MS operation mode A is in an ongoing circuit-switched
transaction, it shall initiate the appropriate MM specific procedure
after the circuit-switched transaction has been released. The MM
sublayer of the MS operating in MS operation mode A shall act as in
network operation mode II as long as the combined GMM procedures are not
successful and no new RA is entered;

\- if the update type is \"periodic updating\", a GPRS MS operating in
MS operation mode B in network operation mode I shall proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedures. The MM sublayer shall act as in
network operation mode II as long as the combined GMM procedures are not
successful and no new RA is entered; and

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode II which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs, or SMS
over SGs only, and which did not perform a successful generic location
updating procedure since the last intersystem change from S1 mode to
A/Gb or Iu mode shall proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures.

##### 4.7.5.1.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) If a lower layer failure occurs before the message ROUTING AREA
UPDATE COMPLETE has been received from the MS and a P-TMSI and/or PTMSI
signature has been assigned, the network shall abort the procedure and
shall consider both, the old and new P-TMSI and the corresponding P-TMSI
signatures as valid until the old P-TMSI can be considered as invalid by
the network (see subclause 4.7.1.5). During this period the network may
use the identification procedure followed by a P-TMSI reallocation
procedure if the old P-TMSI is used by the MS in a subsequent message.

NOTE 1: Optionally, paging with IMSI may be used if paging with old and
new P-TMSI fails. Paging with IMSI causes the MS to re-attach as
described in subclause 4.7.9.1.

b\) Protocol error

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message has been received with a
protocol error, the network shall return a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT
message with one of the following reject causes:

\#96: Mandatory information element error;

\#99: Information element non-existent or not implemented;

\#100: Conditional IE error;

\#111: Protocol error, unspecified.

c\) T3350 time-out

On the first expiry of the timer, the network shall retransmit the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message and shall reset and restart timer
T3350. The retransmission is performed four times, i.e. on the fifth
expiry of timer T3350, the routing area updating procedure is aborted.
Both, the old and the new P-TMSI and the corresponding P-TMSI signatures
shall be considered as valid until the old P-TMSI can be considered as
invalid by the network(see subclause 4.7.1.5). During this period the
network acts as described for case a above.

![](media/image16.emf){width="5.597222222222222in"
height="3.6944444444444446in"}

Figure 4.7.5/1 3GPP TS 24.008: Routing and combined routing area
updating procedure

d.1) ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST received after the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT message has been sent and before the ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE
message is received

\- If one or more of the information elements in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message differ from the ones received within the previous
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, the previously initiated routing
area updating procedure shall be aborted if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
COMPLETE message has not been received and the new routing area updating
procedure shall be progressed, or

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT message shall be resent and the timer T3350 shall be
restarted if an ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message is expected. In
that case, the retransmission counter related to T3350 is not
incremented.

d.2) More than one ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST received and no ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message has been sent

\- If one or more of the information elements in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message differs from the ones received within the previous
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, the previously initiated routing
area updating procedure shall be aborted and the new routing area
updating procedure shall be progressed;

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the network shall
continue with the previous routing area updating procedure and shall not
treat any further this ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.

e\) DETACH REQUEST message received before the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message is sent or before the ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message (in
case of P-TMSI and/or TMSI was allocated) is received.

GPRS detach containing cause \"power off\":

The network shall abort the signalling for the routing area updating
procedure towards the MS and shall progress the detach procedure as
described in subclause 4.7.4.1.

NOTE 2: Internally in the network, before processing the detach request,
the SGSN can perform the necessary signalling procedures for the routing
area updating procedure before progressing the detach procedure.

GPRS detach containing other causes than \"power off\":

The network shall proceed with the routing area updating procedure and
shall progress the detach procedure after successful completion of the
routing area updating procedure.

f\) ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message with update type IE indicating
\"periodic updating\" is received by the network, the network does not
have the GMM context data related to the subscription, and the network
operates in network operation mode I.

The network may send the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message with GMM
cause value \#10 \"Implicitly detached\".

#### 4.7.5.2 Combined routing area updating procedure

##### 4.7.5.2.0 General

Within a combined routing area updating procedure the messages ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT and ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE carry information
for the routing area updating and the location area updating.

##### 4.7.5.2.1 Combined routing area updating procedure initiation

The combined routing area updating procedure is initiated only by a GPRS
MS operating in MS operation modes A or B, if the MS is in state
GMM-REGISTERED and MM-IDLE, and if the network operates in network
operation mode I:

\- when a GPRS MS that is IMSI attached for GPRS and non-GPRS services
detects a change of the routing area in state GMM-REGISTERED and
MM-IDLE, unless the MS is configured for \"AttachWithIMSI\" as specified
in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\] and is entering a
routing area in a new PLMN that is neither the registered PLMN nor in
the list of equivalent PLMNs;

\- when a GPRS MS that is IMSI attached for GPRS services wants to
perform an IMSI attach for non-GPRS services;

\- after termination of a non-GPRS service via non-GPRS channels to
update the association if the MS has changed the RA during that non-GPRS
service transaction;

\- after termination of a non-GPRS service via non-GPRS channels to
update the association if GPRS services were suspended during the
non-GPRS service but no resume is received. See 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]
subclause 16.2.1;

\- after termination of a non-GPRS service via non-GPRS channels to
update the association, if the GPRS MS in MS operation mode A performed
a normal GPRS attach or a normal routing area updating procedure during
the circuit-switched transaction;

\- after a CM SERVICE REJECT message with cause value \#4 is received by
the mobile station (see subclause 4.5.1.1); in this case the update type
IE shall be set to \"Combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\";

\- when a GPRS MS needs to update the network with the new MS Radio
Access Capability IE;

\- when a GPRS MS needs to update the network with a new DRX parameter
IE;

\- in Iu mode, to re-synchronize the PMM mode of MS and network after
RRC connection release with cause \"Directed signalling connection
re-establishment\", see subclause 4.7.2.5;

\- in Iu mode, to re-synchronize the PMM mode of MS and network after
inter-system change not due to PS handover from PMM-CONNECTED mode in Iu
mode to A/Gb mode or S1 mode, if the MS performed an inter - system
change back to Iu mode without sending a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message while in A/Gb mode or a TRACKING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message
while in S1 mode;

\- in Iu mode and A/Gb mode, after intersystem change from S1 mode, and
the GMM receives an indication of \"RRC connection failure\" from lower
layers due to lower layer failure while in S1 mode. In this case, if the
TIN indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\", the MS shall set the TIN to \"GUTI\"
before initiating the routing area updating procedure;

\- in A/Gb mode, after intersystem change from S1 mode if the TIN
indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\", but the MS is required to perform
routing area updating for IMS voice termination as specified in annex
P.4;

\- when the MS enters GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE and the TIN
indicates \"GUTI\";

\- when the MS supports SRVCC and changes the mobile station classmark
2, mobile station classmark 3 or the supported codecs;

\- when the MS which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs,
or SMS over SGs only, enters a GERAN or UTRAN cell and timer T3423 has
expired, or is in the GERAN or UTRAN cell when timer T3423 expires;

\- when due to a manual CSG selection the GPRS MS has selected a CSG
cell whose CSG identity and associated PLMN identity are not included in
the MS\'s Allowed CSG list or in the MS\'s Operator CSG list;

\- when the MS changes the MS network capability information;

\- when the UE\'s usage setting or the voice domain preference for
E-UTRAN change in the MS;

\- when the MS activates mobility management for IMS voice termination
as specified in annex P.2 and the TIN indicates \"RAT-related TMSI\";

\- upon reception of a paging indication using P-TMSI, if the timer
T3346 is running and the MS is in state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE and the RAI of the current cell is
same as the stored RAI;

\- when the MS which is configured to use CS fallback and SMS over SGs,
or SMS over SGs only, enters a GERAN or UTRAN cell, after intersystem
change from S1 mode to Iu or A/Gb mode not due to CS fallback, and the
location area of the current cell is different from the location area
stored in the MS;

\- in A/Gb mode, after intersystem change from S1 mode via cell change
order procedure not due to CS fallback, if the TIN indicates
\"RAT-related TMSI\"; in this case the MS shall set the TIN to \"GUTI\"
before initiating the combined routing area updating procedure;

\- in A/Gb mode, after Inter RAT handover from S1 mode or Iu mode;

\- when the MS needs to request the use of PSM or needs to stop the use
of PSM;

\- when the MS needs to request the use of eDRX or needs to stop the use
of eDRX;

\- when a change in the eDRX usage conditions at the MS requires
different extended DRX parameters;

\- when a change in the PSM usage conditions at the MS requires a
different timer T3312 value or different timer T3324 value; or

NOTE 1: A change in the PSM or eDRX usage conditions at the MS can
include e.g. a change in the MS configuration, a change in requirements
from upper layers or the battery running low at the MS.

\- when the Default\_DCN\_ID value changes, as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\].

NOTE 2: The routing area updating procedure is initiated after deleting
the DCN-ID list as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], annex C.

In A/Gb mode, the routing and location area identification are broadcast
on the broadcast channel(s). A combined routing area updating procedure
shall abort any ongoing GMM procedure. Aborted GMM procedures shall be
repeated after the combined routing area updating procedure has been
successfully performed. The ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall
always be the first message sent from the MS in the new routing area
after routing area change.

In Iu mode, the routing and location area identification are broadcast
on the broadcast channel(s) or sent to the MS via the PS signalling
connection. A combined routing area updating procedure shall abort any
ongoing GMM procedure. Aborted GMM procedures may be repeated after the
combined routing area updating procedure has been successfully
performed. The ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall always be the
first GMM message sent from the MS in the new routing area after routing
area change.

To initiate a combined routing area updating procedure the MS sends the
message ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST to the network, starts timer T3330
and changes to state GMM-ROUTING-UPDATING-INITIATED and MM LOCATION
UPDATING PENDING. The value of the Update type IE in the message shall
indicate \"combined RA/LA updating\" unless explicitly specified
otherwise. If for the last attempt to update the registration of the
location area a MM specific procedure was performed, the value of the
Update type IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message shall indicate
\"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\". Furthermore the MS shall
include the TMSI status IE if no valid TMSI is available. If the MS has
stored a valid LAI and the MS supports EMM combined procedures, the MS
shall include it in the Old location area identification IE in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. If timer T3302 is currently
running, the MS shall stop timer T3302. If timer T3311 is currently
running, the MS shall stop timer T3311.

If the MS has stored a valid TMSI, the MS shall include the TMSI based
NRI container IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.

A GPRS MS in MS operation modes B that is in an ongoing circuit-switched
transaction, shall initiate the combined routing area updating procedure
after the circuit-switched transaction has been released, if the MS has
changed the RA during the circuit-switched transaction and if the
network operates in network operation mode I.

A GPRS MS in MS operation mode A shall initiate the combined routing
area updating procedure with IMSI attach after the circuit-switched
transaction has been released, if a normal GPRS attach or a normal
routing area updating procedure was performed during the
circuit-switched transaction and provided that the network operates in
network operation mode I.

A GPRS MS in MS operation mode A shall perform the normal routing area
update procedure during an ongoing circuit-switched transaction.

If the MS initiates the combined routing area updating procedure for
GPRS services and \"SMS-only service\", the MS shall indicate \"SMS
only\" in the Additional update type IE.

In Iu mode, if the MS wishes to prolong the established PS signalling
connection after the normal routing area updating procedure (for
example, the MS has any CM application request pending), it may set a
follow-on request pending indicator on (see subclause 4.7.13).

In Iu mode, when a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST is received by the SGSN
over a new PS signalling connection while there is an ongoing PS
signalling connection (network is already in mode PMM-CONNECTED) for
this MS, the network shall progress the routing area update procedure as
normal and release the previous PS signalling connection when the
routing area update procedure has been accepted by the network.

NOTE 3: The re-establishment of the radio bearers of active PDP contexts
is done as described in subclause \"Service Request procedure\".

If the combined routing area updating procedure is initiated due to the
reception of the paging indication while T3346 is running, the
\"follow-on request pending\" indication shall be set to 1.

##### 4.7.5.2.2 GMM Common procedure initiation

The network may initiate GMM common procedures, e.g. the GMM
authentication and ciphering procedure.

##### 4.7.5.2.3 Combined routing area updating procedure accepted by the network

Depending on the value of the update result IE received in the ROUTING
AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, two different cases can be distinguished:

Case 1) The update result IE value indicates \"combined RA/LA\": Routing
and location area updating is successful;

Case 2) The update result IE value indicates \"RA only\": Routing area
updating is successful, but location area updating is not successful.

A ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message shall be returned to the network
if the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message containsany of:

\- a P-TMSI and/or a TMSI;

\- Receive N‑PDU Numbers (see 3GPP TS 44.065 \[78\] and
3GPP TS 25.322 \[19b\]); or

\- a request for the provision of Inter RAT handover information.

If Receive N‑PDU Numbers were included, the Receive N‑PDU Numbers that
are valid in the MS shall be included in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
COMPLETE message.

If the network has requested the provision of Inter RAT handover
information the MS shall return a ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message
including the Inter RAT handover information IE, as applicable, to the
network.

In Iu mode, if the network wishes to prolong the PS signalling
connection (for example, if the mobile station has indicated \"follow-on
request pending\" in ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message) the network
shall indicate the \"follow-on proceed\" in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
ACCEPT message. If the network wishes to release the PS signalling
connection, the network shall indicate \"no follow-on proceed\" in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message.

After that in Iu mode, the mobile station shall act according to the
follow-on proceed flag included in the Update result information element
in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message (see subclause 4.7.13).

If the network supports CS Fallback, and the mobile station has
indicated support of EMM combined procedures in MS network capability,
the network shall indicate in the Update result IE in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT message that ISR is not activated.

##### 4.7.5.2.3.1 Combined routing area updating successful {#combined-routing-area-updating-successful .H6}

The description for normal routing area update as specified in
subclause 4.7.5.1.3 shall be followed. In addition, the following
description for location area updating applies.

The handling at the receipt of the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT depends on
the value received in the update result IE as specified below.

The TMSI reallocation may be part of the combined routing area updating
procedure. The TMSI allocated is then included in the ROUTING AREA
UPDATE ACCEPT message together with the location area identification
(LAI). The network shall, in this case, change to state
GMM-COMMON-PROCEDURE-INITIATED and shall start the timer T3350 as
described in subclause 4.7.6.

The MS, receiving a ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, stores the
received location area identification, stops timer T3330, enters state
MM IDLE, reset the location update attempt counter and sets the update
status to U1 UPDATED. If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains
an IMSI, the mobile station is not allocated any TMSI, and shall delete
any TMSI accordingly. If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contains
a TMSI, the MS shall use this TMSI as new temporary identity. The MS
shall delete its old TMSI and shall store the new TMSI. In this case, an
ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message is returned to the network. If
neither a TMSI nor an IMSI has been included by the network in the
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the old TMSI, if any is available,
shall be kept.

If the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
non-GPRS services\" events (see subclause 4.1.1.6A), then the MS shall
reset this counter.

If the MS is not configured for NAS signalling low priority, and any of
the following conditions is fulfilled:

\- the MS initiated the combined routing area updating procedure due to
a change of the registered location area;

\- the value of the Update type IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message indicated \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\"; or

\- the MS indicated support of EMM combined procedures in the MS network
capability;

then the MS may stop timer T3246 if running.

Any timer used for triggering the location updating procedure (e.g.
T3211, T3212) shall be stopped if running.

The network receiving a ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message stops timer
T3350, changes to GMM-REGISTERED state

NOTE: Upon receiving a ROUTING AREA UPDATE COMPLETE message, the SGSN
sends a BSSAP+-TMSI-REALLOCATION-COMPLETE message as specified in
3GPP TS 29.018 \[149\].

##### 4.7.5.2.3.2 Combined routing area updating successful for GPRS services only {#combined-routing-area-updating-successful-for-gprs-services-only .H6}

Apart from the actions on the routing area updating attempt counter, the
description for normal routing area update as specified in
subclause 4.7.5.1.3 shall be followed. In addition, the following
description for location area updating applies.

The SGSN shall use GMM cause \#28 \"SMS provided via GPRS in this
routing area\" in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message only if the MS
requested \"SMS-only service\" by including the Additional update type
IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message. The SGSN may indicate in
the Update result IE in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message that ISR
is activated.

The MS receiving the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message takes one of the
following actions depending on the GMM cause:

\#2 (IMSI unknown in HLR);

The MS shall stop timer T3330 if still running and shall reset the
routing area updating attempt counter. The MS shall set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The MS shall enter state
GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The new MM state is MM IDLE. The SIM/USIM
shall be considered as invalid for non-GPRS services until switching off
or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

\#16 (MSC temporarily not reachable); or

\#17 (Network failure)

The MS shall stop timer T3330 if still running, and shall enter state
MM-IDLE. The routing area updating attempt counter shall be incremented.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is less than 5, and the
stored RAI is equal to the RAI of the current serving cell and the GMM
update status is equal to GU1 UPDATED:

\- the MS shall keep the GMM update status GU1 UPDATED and changes state
to GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM. The MS shall start timer
T3311. When timer T3311 expires the combined routing area update
procedure indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\" is
triggered again.

If the routing area updating attempt counter is greater than or equal to
5:

\- the MS shall start timer T3302 and shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM;

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall then proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedure; a GPRS MS operating in MS operation
mode B may then proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures.\
The MM sublayer shall act as in network operation mode II as long as the
combined GMM procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered.

\# 22 (Congestion);

The MS shall change to state GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM,
shall stop timer T3330 if still running, and shall enter state MM-IDLE.
The MS shall set the routing area updating attempt counter to 5 and
shall start timer T3302.

\# 28 (SMS provided via GPRS in this routing area);

The MS shall stop timer T3330 if still running and shall reset the
routing area updating attempt counter. The MS shall set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The MS shall enter state
GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process.

Other GMM causevalues and the case that no GMM cause IE was received are
considered as abnormal cases. The combined routing area updating shall
be considered as failed for non-GPRS services. The specification of the
MS behaviour in those cases is specified in subclause 4.7.5.2.5.

##### 4.7.5.2.4 Combined routing area updating not accepted by the network

If the combined routing area updating cannot be accepted, the network
sends a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message to the MS. An MS that
receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message containing a reject cause
other than GMM cause value \#25 or the message is integrity protected,
shall stop the timer T3330, and shall enter the state MM IDLE. If a
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message containing a reject cause other than
GMM cause value \#25 is received or the message is integrity protected,
the MS shall stop any ongoing transmission of user data.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message containing GMM cause value
\#25 was received without integrity protection, then the MS shall
discard the message.

If the routing area update request is rejected due to general NAS level
mobility management congestion control, the network shall set the GMM
cause value to \#22 \"congestion\" and assign a back-off timer T3346.

The MS shall then take different actions depending on the received
reject cause:

\# 3 (Illegal MS);

\# 6 (Illegal ME), or

\# 8 (GPRS services and non GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and
the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it
according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any P-TMSI, P-TMSI
signature, TMSI, RAI, LAI, ciphering key sequence number and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number. The MS shall consider the SIM/USIM as
invalid for GPRS and non GPRS services until switching off or the
SIM/USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in
subclause 4.1.1.6. The MS shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, and
shall enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower
layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\",
then the MS shall set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum
value.

NOTE 1: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9 for reject cause \#8.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the combined tracking area update procedure is rejected with
the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 7 (GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS services until
switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The MS shall enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.

If the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower
layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid
for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services is still IMSI attached for CS services in the
network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I shall then proceed with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

NOTE 2: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the combined tracking area update procedure is rejected with
the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 9 (MS identity cannot be derived by the network);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED (and shall
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED, and shall delete any P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and
GPRS ciphering key sequence number.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I which is already IMSI attached for CS services in the network, is
still IMSI attached for CS services in the network.

If the rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services, then

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B shall proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedures. The MM sublayer shall act as in
network operation mode II as long as the combined GMM procedures are not
successful and no new RA is entered; and

\- the MS may subsequently, automatically initiate the GPRS attach
procedure.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the combined tracking area update procedure is rejected with
the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 10 (Implicitly detached);

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I, is IMSI detached for both GPRS and CS services in the network.

The MS shall enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. If the
rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services, the MS shall then perform a new attach procedure. The
MS should also activate PDP context(s) that were originally activated by
the MS to replace any previously MS activated PDP context(s). The MS
should also perform the procedures needed in order to activate any
previously active multicast service(s).

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM state as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined
tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

NOTE 3: In some cases, user interaction may be required and then the MS
cannot activate the PDP/MBMS context(s) automatically.

\# 11 (PLMN not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and
the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it
according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.
Furthermore, the MS shall delete any P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, TMSI,
RAI, LAI, ciphering key sequence number GPRS ciphering key sequence
number, shall delete the list of equivalent PLMNs, and shall reset the
routing area updating attempt counter and the location update attempt
counter.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\" and
if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\]
or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall start timer T3245 and
proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been
successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains
a PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the MS shall set
this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum value.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall then perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined
tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

\# 12 (Location area not allowed);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering
key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset
the routing area updating attempt counter and shall change to state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall in addition set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number
and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The new MM state is
MM IDLE.

The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for regional provision of service\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall perform a cell selection according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\]
and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 4: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined
tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

\# 13 (Roaming not allowed in this location area);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2), and shall delete the list
of equivalent PLMNs. The MS shall reset the routing area updating
attempt counter, and shall enter the state
GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall in addition set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The new MM state is
MM IDLE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122
\[14\].

The MS shall indicate the Update type IE \"combined RA/LA updating with
IMSI attach\" when performing the routing area updating procedure
following the PLMN selection.

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the combined tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM
cause with the same value.

\# 14 (GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN);

The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored, shall set the GPRS update status
to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to
subclause 4.1.3.2), shall reset the routing area updating attempt
counter and shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMNs for GPRS
service\" list and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described subclause 4.1.1.6. If the
message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and
the MS maintains a PLMN-specific PS-attempt counter for that PLMN, then
the MS shall set this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum
value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services is still IMSI attached for CS services in the
network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I shall then proceed with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

As an implementation option, a GPRS MS operating in operation mode A or
B may perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If an MS in GAN mode performs a PLMN selection, it shall request a PLMN
list in GAN (see 3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN
selection from this list according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

The MS shall not perform the optional PLMN selection in the case where
the PLMN providing this reject cause is:

\- On the \"User Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology \" or,

\- On the \"Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology \"
list or,

\- A PLMN identified as equivalent to any PLMN, within the same country,
contained in the lists above.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, KSI and tracking area updating attempt counter as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the combined
tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the
same value.

\# 15 (No Suitable Cells In Location Area);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to clause 4.1.3.2), shall reset the routing
area updating attempt counter and shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

The MS shall in addition set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The new MM state is
MM IDLE.

The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas for
roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area
according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 5: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

The MS shall indicate the Update type IE \"combined RA/LA updating with
IMSI attach\" when performing the routing area updating procedure.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the combined tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM
cause with the same value.

\#22 (Congestion);

If the T3346 value IE is present in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT
message and the value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor
deactivated, the MS shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall
be considered as an abnormal case and the behaviour of the MS for this
case is specified in subclause 4.7.5.2.5.

The MS shall abort the routing area updating procedure, reset the
routing area updating attempt counter and set the GPRS update status to
GU2 NOT UPDATED. If the rejected request was not for initiating a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services, the MS shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE.

The MS shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is integrity protected, the MS
shall start timer with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

If the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is not integrity protected,
the ME shall start timer T3346 with a random value from the default
range specified in table 11.3a.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies the normal cell
reselection process. The routing area updating procedure is started, if
still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with
the same value.

\#25 (Not authorized for this CSG)

Cause \#25 is only applicable in UTRAN Iu mode and when received from a
CSG cell. Other cases are considered as abnormal cases and the
specification of the mobile station behaviour is given in
subclause 4.7.5.2.5.

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall reset the routing
area updating attempt counter. The state is changed to
GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message are contained in the
Allowed CSG list stored in the MS, the MS shall remove the entry
corresponding to this CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the
Allowed CSG list.

If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS has
sent the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message are contained in the
Operator CSG list, the MS shall proceed as specified in
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\] subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location update attempt counter.
The new MM state is MM IDLE.

The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status and tracking area updating
attempt counter as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when
the combined tracking area update procedure is rejected with the EMM
cause with the same value.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The specification of the
MS behaviour in those cases is described in subclause 4.7.5.2.5.

##### 4.7.5.2.5 Abnormal cases in the MS

The MS shall proceed as follows:

1\) If the combined routing area update was successful for GPRS services
only and the ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message contained a cause value
not treated in subclause 4.7.5.2.3.2 or the GMM Cause IE is not included
in the message, the MS shall proceed as follows:

a\) The MS shall stop timer T3330 if still running, and shall enter state
MM IDLE. The routing area updating attempt counter shall be incremented;

b\) If the routing area updating attempt counter is less than 5, and the
stored RAI is equal to the RAI of the current serving cell and the GMM
update status is equal to GU1 UPDATED:

\- the MS shall keep the GMM update status GU1 UPDATED and changes state
to GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM. The MS shall start timer
T3311. When timer T3311 expires the combined routing area update
procedure indicating \"combined RA/LA updating with IMSI attach\" is
triggered again; and

c\) If the routing area updating attempt counter is greater than or equal
to 5:

\- the MS shall start timer T3302 and shall change to state
GMM-REGISTERED.ATTEMPTING-TO-UPDATE-MM; and

\- a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall then proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedure; a GPRS MS operating in MS operation
mode B may then proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures. The MM
sublayer shall act as in network operation mode II or as long as the
combined GMM procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered;

2\) Combined routing area updating and paging for non-GPRS services
procedure collision

If the MS receives a paging for non-GPRS services before the routing
area updating procedure has been completed, the MS shall progress the
routing area updating procedure and respond to the paging for non-GPRS
services when the MS has completed the routing area updating procedure
or aborted the procedure for other reasons. The MS shall return to MM
state MM IDLE and proceed with the appropriate MM specific procedures to
respond to the paging for non-GPRS services; and

3\) otherwise, the abnormal cases specified in subclause 4.7.5.1.5 apply
with the following modification.

If the GPRS routing area updating attempt counter is incremented
according to subclause 4.7.5.1.5 the next actions depend on the Location
Area Identities (stored on SIM/USIM and the one of the current serving
cell) and the value of the routing area updating attempt counter.

\- if the update status is U1 UPDATED, and the stored LAI is equal to
the one of the current serving cell and the routing area updating
attempt counter is smaller than 5, then the mobile station shall keep
the update status to U1 UPDATED, the new MM state is MM IDLE substate
NORMAL SERVICE;

\- if the routing area updating attempt counter is smaller than 5 and,
additionally, the update status is different from U1 UPDATED or the
stored LAI is different from the one of the current serving cell, the
mobile station shall delete any LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence number
stored in the SIM/USIM and list of equivalent PLMNs and set the update
status to U2 NOT UPDATED. The MM state remains MM LOCATION UPDATING
PENDING; or

\- if the routing area updating attempt counter is greater or equal to
5, the mobile station shall delete any LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence
number stored in the SIM/USIM and the list of equivalent PLMNs, and
shall set the update status to U2 NOT UPDATED.\
A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall then proceed with
appropriate MM specific procedure; a GPRS MS operating in MS operation
mode B may then proceed with appropriate MM specific procedures.\
The MM sublayer shall act as in network operation mode II as long as the
combined GMM procedures are not successful and no new RA is entered. The
new MM state is MM IDLE substate ATTEMPTING TO UPDATE or optionally MM
IDLE substate PLMN SEARCH in order to perform a PLMN selection according
to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

##### 4.7.5.2.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The abnormal cases specified in subclause 4.7.5.1.6 apply.

### 4.7.6 P-TMSI reallocation procedure

#### 4.7.6.0 General

A temporary mobile station identity for GPRS services, the Packet-TMSI
(P-TMSI), is used for identification within the radio interface
signalling procedures. The structure of the P-TMSI is specified in
3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]. The P-TMSI has significance only within a routing
area. Outside the routing area the P-TMSI has to be combined with the
routing area identification (RAI) to provide for an unambiguous
identity.

The purpose of the P-TMSI reallocation procedure is to provide identity
confidentiality, i.e. to protect a user against being identified and
located by an intruder (see 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\], 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]
and 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]).

Usually, P-TMSI reallocation is performed at least at each change of a
routing area (Such choices are left to the network operator).

The reallocation of a P-TMSI is performed by the unique procedure
defined in subclause 4.7.6. This procedure can only be initiated by the
network in state GMM-REGISTERED.

P-TMSI can also be implicitly reallocated in the attach or routing area
updating procedures (see subclauses 4.7.3.1 and 4.7.5). The implicit
reallocation of a P-TMSI is described in the corresponding subclauses.

NOTE: Normally, the P-TMSI reallocation will take place in conjunction
with another GMM procedure, e.g. at routing area updating (see
3GPP TS 29.002 \[37\]).

#### 4.7.6.1 P-TMSI reallocation initiation by the network

The network shall initiate the P-TMSI reallocation procedure by sending
a P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message to the MS and shall start the
timer T3350.

The P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message shall contain a new combination
of P-TMSI, RAI and optionally a P-TMSI signature or a DCN-ID or both
allocated by the network.

The network may suspend the transmission of user data during the P-TMSI
reallocation procedure.

#### 4.7.6.2 P-TMSI reallocation completion by the MS

Upon receipt of the P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message, the MS shall
store the routing area identifier (RAI) and the P-TMSI. Furthermore, the
MS shall send a P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE message to the network.

If a P-TMSI signature is present in the P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND
message, the MS shall store the new P-TMSI signature and shall if
available delete the old P-TMSI signature. If no P-TMSI signature is
present in the P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message, the old P-TMSI
signature, if available, shall be kept.

If the P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message contains the DCN-ID IE, then
the MS shall store the included DCN-ID value together with the PLMN code
of the registered PLMN in a DCN-ID list in a non-volatile memory in the
ME as described in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\], annex C.

#### 4.7.6.3 P-TMSI reallocation completion by the network

Upon receipt of the P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMPLETE message, the network
shall stop the timer T3350 and shall consider both the old and the new
P-TMSI and the corresponding P-TMSI signatures as valid until the old
P-TMSI can be considered as invalid by the network (see
subclause 4.7.1.5).

In A/Gb mode, the GMM layer shall notify the LLC layer that the P-TMSI
has been changed (see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]).

#### 4.7.6.3A Abnormal cases in the MS

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

If different new P-TMSIs are included in subsequent P-TMSI REALLOCATION
COMMAND messages due to an aborted or repeated P-TMSI reallocation
procedure, the MS shall behave as described in subclause 4.7.6.2.
Furthermore, the MS shall take action on the P-TMSI as described in
subclause 4.7.1.5.

#### 4.7.6.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Lower layer failure

If a lower layer failure is detected before the P-TMSI REALLOCATION
COMPLETE message is received, the network shall consider both the old
and the new P-TMSI as occupied until the old P-TMSI can be considered as
invalid (see subclause 4.7.1.5).

During this period the network:

\- may first use the old P-TMSI for paging for an implementation
dependent number of paging attempts in the case of network-originated
transactions. Upon response from the MS, the network may re-initiate the
P-TMSI reallocation procedure. If no response is received to the paging
attempts, the network may use the new P-TMSI for paging for an
implementation dependent number of paging attempts. Upon response from
the MS, the network shall consider the new P-TMSI as valid and the old
P-TMSI as invalid. If no response is received to the paging attempts,
the network may use the IMSI for paging for an implementation dependent
number of paging attempts;

NOTE: Paging with IMSI causes the MS to re-attach as described in
subclause 4.7.9.1.

\- shall consider the new P-TMSI as valid if it is used by the MS (see
subclause 4.7.1.5); or

\- may use the identification procedure followed by a new P-TMSI
reallocation, if the MS uses the old P-TMSI.

b\) Expiry of timer T3350

The P-TMSI reallocation procedure is supervised by the timer T3350 (see
example in figure 4.7.6/1). On the first expiry of timer T3350, the
network shall reset and restart timer T3350 and shall retransmit the
P-TMSI REALLOCATION COMMAND message. This retransmission is repeated
four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3350, the network shall
abort the P-TMSI reallocation procedure and shall follow the rules for
case a as described above.

c\) P-TMSI reallocation and GPRS attach procedure collision

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
P-TMSI reallocation procedure has been completed, the network shall
proceed with the GPRS attach procedure after deletion of the GMM
context.

d\) P-TMSI reallocation and an MS initiated GPRS detach procedure
collision

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
P-TMSI reallocation procedure has been completed, the network shall
abort the P-TMSI reallocation procedure and shall progress the GPRS
detach procedure.

e\) P-TMSI reallocation and a routing area updating procedure collision

If the network receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message before the
ongoing P-TMSI reallocation procedure has been completed, the network
shall abort the P-TMSI reallocation procedure and shall progress the
routing area updating procedure. The network may then perform a new
P-TMSI reallocation.

f\) P-TMSI reallocation and a service request procedure collision

If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message before the ongoing
P-TMSI reallocation procedure procedure has been completed, the network
shall progress both procedures.

![](media/image17.emf){width="4.819444444444445in"
height="1.4166666666666667in"}

Figure 4.7.6/1 3GPP TS 24.008: P-TMSI reallocation procedure

### 4.7.7 Authentication and ciphering procedure

#### 4.7.7a Authentication and ciphering procedure used for UMTS authentication challenge.

The purpose of the authentication and ciphering procedure is fivefold
(see 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] and 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]):

\- to permit the network to check whether the identity provided by the
MS is acceptable or not;

\- to provide parameters enabling the MS to calculate a new GPRS UMTS
ciphering key and a new GPRS UMTS integrity key;

\- to let the network set the GSM ciphering mode (ciphering /no
ciphering) and GSM ciphering algorithm;

\- to permit the mobile station to authenticate the network; and

\- to let the network set GSM integrity protection and GSM integrity
algorithm (for control plane and optionally for user plane).

In Iu mode, and in the case of a UMTS authentication challenge, the
authentication and ciphering procedure can be used for authentication
only.

The cases in which the authentication and ciphering procedure shall be
used are defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\], 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and
3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\].

The authentication and ciphering procedure is always initiated and
controlled by the network. However, in the case of a UMTS authentication
challenge, there is the possibility for the MS to reject the network.

The MS shall support the UMTS authentication challenge, if a USIM is
inserted.

The authentication and ciphering procedure can be used for any
combination of the following:

\- authentication;

\- setting of the GSM ciphering mode and the GSM ciphering algorithm;
and

\- setting of GSM integrity protection and the GSM integrity algorithm
(for control plane and optionally for user plane).

NOTE: Setting of GSM integrity protection and the GSM integrity
algorithm in the authentication and ciphering procedure is only
applicable for an MS and a network supporting integrity protection in
A/Gb mode.

In A/Gb mode, the network should not send any user data during the
authentication and ciphering procedure.

A UMTS security context is established in the MS and the network when a
UMTS authentication challenge is performed in A/Gb mode or in Iu mode.
After a successful UMTS authentication, the GPRS UMTS ciphering key, the
GPRS UMTS integrity key, the GPRS GSM ciphering key and the GPRS
ciphering key sequence number, are stored both in the network and the
MS. Furthermore, in A/Gb mode both the ME and the network may derive and
store a GPRS GSM Kc~128~ as part of the UMTS security context as
described in the subclause 4.7.7.3a. Furthermore, in A/Gb mode, if
integrity protection is used, both the MS and the network shall derive
and store a GPRS GSM Kint as part of the UMTS security context as
described in the subclause 4.7.7.3b.

#### 4.7.7b Authentication and ciphering procedure used for GSM authentication challenge

The purpose of the authentication and ciphering procedure is threefold
(see 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]):

\- to permit the network to check whether the identity provided by the
MS is acceptable or not;

\- to provide parameters enabling the MS to calculate a new GPRS GSM
ciphering key; and

\- to let the network set the GSM ciphering mode (ciphering/no
ciphering) and GSM ciphering algorithm.

The authentication and ciphering procedure can be used for either:

\- authentication only;

\- setting of the GSM ciphering mode and the GSM ciphering algorithm
only; or

\- authentication and the setting of the GSM ciphering mode and the GSM
ciphering algorithm.

The cases in which the authentication and ciphering procedure shall be
used are defined in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\].

In A/Gb mode, the authentication and ciphering procedure is always
initiated and controlled by the network. It shall be performed in a non
ciphered mode because of the following reasons:

\- the network cannot decipher a ciphered AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING
RESPONSE from an unauthorised MS and put it on the black list; and

\- to be able to define a specific point in time from which on a new
GPRS GSM ciphering key should be used instead of the old one.

GSM authentication challenge shall be supported by a ME supporting GERAN
or UTRAN.

In A/Gb mode, the network should not send any user data during the
authentication and ciphering procedure.

A GSM security context is established in the MS and the network when a
GSM authentication challenge is performed in A/Gb mode or in Iu mode.
However, in Iu mode the MS shall not accept a GSM authentication
challenge, if a USIM is inserted. After a successful GSM authentication
challenge, the GPRS GSM ciphering key and the GPRS ciphering key
sequence number, are stored both in the network and the MS.

#### 4.7.7c Change of the ciphering algorithm at PS Handover

For PS handover to A/Gb mode (see subclause 10.5.1.14 and
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\]) the network shall either assign a GSM ciphering
algorithm to be used in the target cell or deactivate ciphering in the
target cell. The MS shall start to use the new GSM ciphering algorithm
or deactivate ciphering upon an indication from the lower layers that
the PS handover procedure has been successfully completed (see
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\])

After PS handover to Iu mode (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]) the network shall activate integrity protection
and shall either assign a ciphering algorithm to be used in the target
cell or deactivate ciphering in the target cell, using the security mode
control procedure (3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

If the GSM ciphering algorithm is changed at PS handover and the routing
area updating procedure triggered by the PS handover procedure is not
accepted by the network, the MS shall delete any GPRS ciphering key
sequence number and proceed as specified in subclauses 4.7.5.1.4 and
4.7.5.2.4. If the routing area updating procedure fails, because the
radio resources assigned in the new cell are released before the MS
receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the MS shall delete any
GPRS ciphering key sequence number and proceed as specified in
subclauses 4.7.5.1.5 item b and 4.7.5.2.5, respectively.

#### 4.7.7.1 Authentication and ciphering initiation by the network

The network initiates the authentication and ciphering procedure by
transferring an AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message across
the radio interface and starts timer T3360. The
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message shall contain all
parameters necessary to calculate the response parameters when
authentication is performed (see 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]).

If authentication is requested, then the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING
REQUEST message shall contain either:

\- In a GSM authentication challenge, the GPRS ciphering key sequence
number and the RAND, or

\- In a UMTS authentication challenge, the GPRS ciphering key sequence
number, the RAND and the AUTN.

In A/Gb mode, if authentication is not requested, then the
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message shall not contain neither
the GPRS ciphering key sequence number, the RAND nor the AUTN.

In A/Gb mode, if ciphering is requested, in a GSM authentication
challenge or in a UMTS authentication challenge, then the
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message shall indicate the GPRS
GSM ciphering algorithm.

In A/Gb mode, an MS supporting integrity protection shall ignore a GSM
authentication challenge from the network.

In A/Gb mode, in a UMTS authentication challenge, if the MS has
indicated support for integrity protection in MS network capability IE
included in the ATTACH REQUEST or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message to
the network, then if the network supports integrity protection then the
network shall activate integrity protection in the MS (see
subclause 4.7.3.1.3 and subclause 4.7.5.1.3). If the network does not
activate integrity protection in the MS, then the MS shall detach from
the network.

In A/Gb mode, if no UMTS security context is available in the network or
if no common UMTS security context is available in the MS and the
network, and if the MS has indicated support for integrity protection in
MS network capability IE to the network, then an authentication and
activation of integrity protection and setting of ciphering mode
(enabled or disabled), shall take place in the same authentication and
ciphering procedure. The network shall replay the MS network capability
IE and the MS radio access capability IE received from the MS in the
latest ATTACH REQUEST message or the latest ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message, by including the MS network capability IE and the MS radio
access capability IE in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message
to the MS. The network shall select one of the GPRS GSM integrity
algorithms indicated in the MS network capability IE received from the
MS in the latest ATTACH REQUEST message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST
message. The selected GPRS GSM integrity algorithm shall be included in
the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message. The network shall
enable or disable ciphering and include the selected GPRS GSM ciphering
algorithm if ciphering is enabled. If ciphering is enabled, then the
network shall select one of the GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm indicated
in the MS network capability IE received from the MS in the latest
ATTACH REQUEST message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.The
network shall calculate a message authentication code for the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message at the GMM layer with the
new integrity key, GPRS GSM Kint key, indicated by the GPRS ciphering
key sequence number included in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message. The new GPRS GSM Kint shall be calculated from the new UMTS
security context established in the same procedure as described in the
subclause 4.7.7.3b. The AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message
shall include the calculated message authentication code for integrity
protection.

In A/Gb mode, if an established UMTS security context is available in
the network and if the MS has indicated support for integrity protection
in the MS network capability IE, when authentication takes place in the
authentication and ciphering procedure (regardless whether a change of
the integrity algorithm, ciphering algorithm or a change of ciphering
mode takes place in the same procedure), then the network shall replay
the MS network capability IE and the MS Radio Access Capability IE
received from the MS in the latest ATTACH REQUEST message or the latest
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message, by including the MS network
capability IE and the MS Radio Access Capability IE into the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message to the MS. If a change of
the GPRS GSM integrity algorithm takes place in the same procedure, then
the network shall select one of the GPRS GSMintegrity algorithms
indicated in the MS network capability IE received from the MS in the
latest ATTACH REQUEST message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message.
The selected GPRS GSM integrity algorithm shall be included into the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message. If the network decides to
change the ciphering mode or the ciphering algorithm or both, then if
ciphering is enabled the network shall select one of the GPRS GSM
ciphering algorithms indicated in the MS network capability IE received
from the MS in the latest ATTACH REQUEST message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST message. The network shall also include the ciphering mode or
the selected GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm or both, if ciphering is
enabled (Ciphering algorithm IE) in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
REQUEST message. The network calculates a message authentication code
over the parameters included in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message at the GMM layer with the new integrity key GPRS GSM Kint
indicated by the GPRS ciphering key sequence number included by the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message. The new GPRS GSM Kint
shall be calculated from the new UMTS security context established in
the same procedure as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3b. The
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message shall include the
calculated message authentication code for integrity protection.

In A/Gb mode, if an established UMTS security context context is
available in the network and if the MS has indicated support for
integrity protection in the MS network capability IE to the network, and
if integrity protection is in use, then if only a change of the
integrity algorithm or ciphering algorithm or both, or a change of the
ciphering mode, is requested in the authentication and ciphering
procedure, then the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message shall
include the new GPRS GSM integrity algorithm or the new setting of the
ciphering mode and the new GPRS GSM ciphering algorithm; that shall be
taken into use.

NOTE: The AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message is protected by a
message authentication code in the LLC layer when no authentication
takes place in the authentication and ciphering procedure.Therefore, no
message authentication code shall be calculated and included by the GMM
layer into this message when only an algorithm change takes place. In
addition, there is no need to replay the MS network capability IE and
the MS Radio Access Capability IE in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
REQUEST message when no authentication takes place as a valid UMTS
security context is already established between the MS and network.

The network includes the A&C reference number information element in the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message. Its value is chosen in
order to link an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST in a RA with its
RESPONSE. The A&C reference number value might be based on the RA Colour
Code value.

Additionally, the network may request the MS to include its IMEISV in
the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message.

#### 4.7.7.2 Authentication and ciphering response by the MS

In A/Gb mode, an MS shall be ready to respond upon an
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message at any time.

In UMTS, an MS shall be ready to respond upon an
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message at any time whilst a PS
signalling connection exists.

If a SIM is inserted in the MS, the MS shall ignore the Authentication
Parameter AUTN IE if included in the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING
REQUEST message and perform the GSM authentication challenge. It shall
not perform the authentication of the network described in
subclause 4.7.7.5.1.

In a GSM authentication challenge, if the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING
REQUEST message includes the authentication parameters RAND and GPRS
CKSN, then upon receipt of the message, the MS processes the challenge
information and sends an AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE message
to the network. The value of the received A&C reference number
information element shall be copied into the A&C reference number
information element in the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE
message. A GSM authentication challenge will result in the SIM/USIM
passing a SRES and a GPRS GSM ciphering key to the ME. The new GPRS GSM
ciphering key calculated from the challenge information shall overwrite
the previous one and any previously stored GPRS UMTS ciphering and GPRS
UMTS integrity keys shall be deleted. The calculated GSM ciphering key
shall be stored on the SIM/USIM together with the GPRS ciphering key
sequence number before the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE
message is transmitted.

In a UMTS authentication challenge, if the
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message includes the UMTS
authentication parameters GPRS CKSN, RAND and AUTN, then upon receipt of
the message, the MS verifies the AUTN parameter and if this is accepted,
the MS processes the challenge information and sends an
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE message to the network. The
value of the received A&C reference number information element shall be
copied into the A&C reference number information element in the
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE message. A UMTS authentication
challenge will result in the USIM passing a RES, a GPRS UMTS ciphering
key, a GPRS UMTS integrity key and a GPRS GSM ciphering key to the ME.
The new GPRS UMTS ciphering key, GPRS UMTS integrity key and GPRS GSM
ciphering key calculated from the challenge information shall overwrite
the previous ones. The new GPRS UMTS ciphering key, GPRS UMTS integrity
key and GPRS GSM ciphering key shall be stored on the USIM together with
the GPRS ciphering key sequence number before the
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE message is transmitted.
Furthermore, in A/Gb mode if a GEA ciphering algorithm that requires a
128-bit ciphering key is taken into use, then a new GPRS GSM Kc~128~
shall also be calculated as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3a.

In A/Gb mode, in a UMTS authentication challenge, if the MS supports
integrity protection, then the MS shall ignore the GPRS GSM ciphering
key received from the USIM and not store the GPRS GSM ciphering key in
the ME or on the USIM.

In addition, in A/Gb mode, in a UMTS authentication challenge, if the MS
has indicated support of integrity protection in the MS network
capability IE to the network, and if an authentication takes place in
the authentication and ciphering procedure, then a new GPRS GSM Kint
shall also be calculated by the MS from the new UMTS security context
derived from AKA as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3b. The new GPRS
GSM Kint shall be used by the MS to check and verify the message
authentication code recived in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message as described in Annex H in 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]. If the
integrity is successfully verified in the MS, then the MS shall check if
the replayed MS network capability IE and replayed MS Radio Access
Capability IE received in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message has not been altered compared to the latest MS network
capability IE and the latest MS Radio Access Capability IE that the MS
sent to the network. If the replayed MS network capability IE and the
replayed MS Radio Access Capability IE received in the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message are not the same as the latest MS network
capability IE and the MS Radio Access Capability IE that the MS sent to
the network, then the MS shall ignore the authentication and ciphering
procedure. The network may in addition indicate a GPRS GSM integrity
algorithm and a new setting of the ciphering mode and GPRS GSM ciphering
algorithm, to be taken into use by the MS. If the integrity of the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message is not successfully
verified in the GMM layer, then the MS shall ignore the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message.

In A/Gb mode, in a UMTS authentication challenge if the MS has no
available UMTS security context and, if the MS has indicated support for
integrity protection in MS network capability IE to the network, then if
the network does not activate integrity protection by indicating a GPRS
GSMintegrity algorithm or does not include a message authentication code
to the MS in AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message, then the MS
shall ignore the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message.

In A/Gb mode, in a UMTS authentication challenge, if the MS has
indicated support for integrity protection to the network and if the
integrity of the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message is
successfully verified in the MS and the MS decides to reply by sending
an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message to the network, then
the MS shall integrity protect the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE
message by calculating an message authentication code at the GMM layer
using the new integrity key GPRS GSM Kint calculated by the MS from the
new UMTS security context derived from AKA as described in the
subclause 4.7.7.3b and as described in Annex H in 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]
and include the new message authentication code into the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message. When a successful authentication takes
place on the USIM the GMM layer in the MS shall request the LLC layer to
reset the IOV\_updates counter to the value zero before sending the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message to the network.

In Iu mode, an MS not capable of A/Gb mode shall ignore the Ciphering
Algorithm IE in the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message. An
MS capable of both Iu mode and A/Gb mode shall store the received value
in the Ciphering Algorithm IE in the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING
REQUEST message until entering state GMM-DEREGISTERED, in order to use
it at an inter system change to A/Gb mode. In A/Gb mode, an MS
supporting integrity protection shall store the received value in the
Ciphering Algorithm IE when entering GMM-DEREGISTERED and at MS power
off as described in subclause 4.7.7.3a.

If the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING REQUEST message does not include
neither the GSM authentication parameters (RAND and GPRS CKSN) nor the
UMTS authentication parameters (RAND, AUTN and GPRS CKSN), then upon
receipt of the message, the MS replies by sending an
AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING RESPONSE message to the network.

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, if
the MS has indicated support for integrity protection to the network,
the network may only indicate a GPRS GSM integrity algorithm or a GPRS
GSM ciphering algorithm or a change of ciphering mode setting in the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message without re-authentication
to the MS. The AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message shall
include the new GPRS GSM integrity algorithm or the new GPRS GSM
ciphering algorithm; or both, that shall be taken into use. When the MS
receives this AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message without
requiring a new authentication, then a new GPRS GSM Kint shall be
calculated using the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity
key from the already established UMTS security context stored in the ME
as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3b and a new GPRS GSM Kc~128~ shall
be calculated using the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS
integrity key from the already established UMTS security context stored
in the ME as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3a and the MS replies by
sending an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message to the network.

NOTE: If only a change of GPRS GSM integrity algorithm or GPRS GSM
encryption algorithm or a change of both algorithms is included in the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message without authentication,
then the MS shall not integrity protect the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
RESPONSE message at GMM layer. The MS does therefore not calculate and
include a message authentication code into the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message at GMM layer. These GMM messages are instead
integrity protected at the LLC layer with current UMTS security context.

In A/Gb mode, the GMM layer shall notify the LLC layer if ciphering
shall be used or not and if yes which GSM ciphering algorithm and GPRS
GSM ciphering key that shall be used (see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]).

In A/Gb mode, if an established UMTS security context context is
available in the network, if the MS has indicated support of integrity
protection to the network, then the GMM layer in the MS shall assign the
GPRS GSM integrity algorithm and the GPRS GSM Kint integrity key to the
LLC layer after it has sent off the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
RESPONSE message to the network (see 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and
3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]).

A ME supporting UMTS authentication challenge shall support the
following procedure:

In order to avoid a synchronisation failure, when the mobile station
receives an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message, the mobile
station shall store the received RAND together with the RES returned
from the USIM in the volatile memory and associate it with the PS
domain. When the MS receives a subsequent AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
REQUEST message, if the stored RAND value for the PS domain is equal to
the new received value in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message, then the mobile station shall not pass the RAND to the USIM,
but shall immediately send the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE
message with the stored RES for the PS domain. If, for the PS domain,
there is no valid stored RAND in the mobile station or the stored RAND
is different from the new received value in the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING REQUEST message, the mobile station shall pass the RAND to the
USIM, shall override any previously stored RAND and RES with the new
ones and start, or reset and restart timer T3316.

The RAND and RES values stored in the mobile station shall be deleted
and timer T3316, if running, shall be stopped:

\- upon receipt of a SECURITY MODE COMMAND (Iu mode only),\
SERVICE ACCEPT (Iu mode only),\
SERVICE REJECT (Iu mode only),\
ROUTING AREA UPDATE\_ACCEPT\
or AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message;

\- upon expiry of timer T3316;

\- if the mobile station enters the GMM states GMM-DEREGISTERED or
GMM-NULL; or

\- if the mobile station enters PMM-IDLE mode (Iu mode only).

#### 4.7.7.3 Authentication and ciphering completion by the network

Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message, the
network stops the timer T3360 and checks the validity of the response
(see 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). For this, it may
use the A&C reference number information element within the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message to determine whether the
response is correlating to the last request that was sent.

In A/Gb mode, in a UMTS authentication challenge if the MS has indicated
support of integrity protection to the network and if the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message authentication, then the network shall
check and verify the message authentication code received in the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message from the MS by using the
new integrity key GPRS GSM Kint derived from the new UMTS security
context as described in subclause 4.7.7.3b and annex H in
3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]. When a successful authentication takes place
after a successful verification of the RES and the message
authentication code received in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
RESPONSE message from the MS, the GMM layer in the network shall
indicate this successful authentication to the LLC layer. If the check
and verification of the message authentication code included in the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message fails in the network, then
the network shall ignore the GMM message. If the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message is received in the network without a message
authentication code then the network shall silently discard the GMM
message.

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established GSM security context, the
GMM layer shall notify the LLC sublayer if ciphering shall be used or
not. Furthermore, if ciphering shall be used, then the GMM layer shall
also notify the LLC sublayer which GEA algorithm and GPRS GSM ciphering
key that shall be used (see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]).

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, the
GMM layer shall notify the LLC sublayer if ciphering shall be used or
not. Furthermore, if ciphering shall be used, then the GMM layer shall
also notify the LLC sublayer which GEA algorithm and which ciphering key
(i.e. GPRS GSM ciphering key or GPRS GSM Kc~128~) that shall be used
(see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]). If the network has selected a GEA
ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key, then the ME
shall derive a GPRS GSM Kc~128~ as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3a.

In A/Gb mode, if an established UMTS security context context is
available in the network, if the MS has indicated support of integrity
protection to the network, the GMM layer in the network shall assign the
GPRS GSM integrity algorithm and the GPRS GSM Kint integrity key to the
LLC layer, after it has received the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
RESPONSE message from the MS (see 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\] and
3GPP TS 44.064\[78a\]).

Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE message, the
network stops the timer T3360. In Synch failure case, the core network
may renegotiate with the HLR/AuC and provide the MS with new
authentication parameters.

#### 4.7.7.3a 128-bit packet-switched GSM ciphering key

The ME and the network may derive and store a 128-bit packet-switched
GSM key or GPRS GSM Kc~128~ from an established UMTS security context.
If the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ exits, then it is also part of the UMTS security
context.

The ME with a USIM in use shall compute a new GPRS GSM Kc~128~ using the
GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key from an
established UMTS security context as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].
The new GPRS GSM Kc~128~ shall be stored only in the ME. The ME shall
overwrite the existing GPRS GSM Kc~128~ with the new GPRS GSM Kc~128~.
The ME shall delete the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ at switch off, when the USIM is
disabled as well as under the conditions identified in the
subclause 4.1.3.2 and 4.7.7.4. The ME with a USIM in use shall apply the
GPRS GSM Kc~128~ when in A/Gb mode a GEA ciphering algorithm that
requires a 128-bit ciphering key is taken into use.

The network shall compute the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ using the GPRS UMTS
integrity key and the GPRS UMTS ciphering key from an established UMTS
security context as specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] only when in A/Gb
mode a GEA ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key is
to be used.

In A/Gb mode, if the MS supports integrity protection, the information
in the Ciphering Algorithm IE together with the IMSI from the USIM shall
be stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME at MS power off. The
information stored in the Ciphering Algorithm IE can only be used if the
IMSI from the USIM matches the IMSI stored in the ME non-volatile memory
at MS power on; otherwise the MS shall delete the Ciphering Algorithm
IE.

#### 4.7.7.3b 128-bit packet-switched GSM integrity key (in A/Gb mode and only if MS supports integrity protection)

The ME and the network may derive and store a 128-bit packet-switched
GPRS GSM Kint from an established UMTS security context. If the GPRS GSM
Kint exits, then it is also part of the UMTS security context.

The ME with a USIM in use shall compute a new GPRS GSM Kint using the
GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key from an
established UMTS security context as specified in 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\].
The new GPRS GSM Kint shall be stored only in the ME. The ME shall
overwrite the existing GPRS GSM Kint with the new GPRS GSM Kint. The ME
shall delete the GPRS GSM Kint at MS switch off, when the USIM is
disabled as well as under the conditions identified in the
subclause 4.1.3.2 and 4.7.7.4. The ME with a USIM in use shall apply the
GPRS GSM Kint when in A/Gb mode a GIA integrityg algorithm that requires
a 128-bit integrity key is taken into use.

The network shall compute the GPRS GSM Kint using the GPRS UMTS
integrity key and the GPRS UMTS ciphering key from an established UMTS
security context as specified in 3GPP TS 43.020 \[13\]only when in A/Gb
mode a GIA integrity algorithm that requires a 128-bit integrity key is
to be used.

At MS power off, the information in the Integrity Algorithm IE shall be
stored in a non-volatile memory in the ME together with the IMSI from
the USIM. The information stored in the Integrity Algorithm IE can only
be used if the IMSI from the USIM matches the IMSI stored in the ME
non-volatile memory at MS power on; otherwise the MS shall delete the
Integrity Algorithm IE.

#### 4.7.7.4 GPRS ciphering key sequence number

The security parameters for authentication and ciphering are tied
together in sets.

In a GSM authentication challenge, from a challenge parameter RAND both
the authentication response parameter SRES and the GPRS GSM ciphering
key can be computed given the secret key associated to the IMSI.

In a UMTS authentication challenge, from a challenge parameter RAND, the
authentication response parameter RES and the GPRS UMTS ciphering key
and the GPRS UMTS integrity key can be computed given the secret key
associated to the IMSI. Furthermore, in the USIM a GPRS GSM ciphering
key can be computed from the GPRS UMTS integrity key and the GPRS UMTS
ciphering key by means of an unkeyed conversion function. Furthermore,
in A/Gb mode if a GEA ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit
ciphering key is taken into use, then a GPRS GSM Kc~128~ shall also be
calculated as described in the subclause 4.7.7.3a. Furthermore, in A/Gb
mode, if the MS and the network support integrity protection, when a GIA
integrity algorithm that requires a 128-bit integrity key is taken into
use, then a GPRS GSM Kint shall also be calculated as described in the
subclause 4.7.7.3b.

In order to allow start of ciphering on a logical link without
authentication, GPRS ciphering key sequence numbers are introduced.

The GPRS ciphering key sequence number is managed by the network such
that the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message contains the GPRS
ciphering key sequence number allocated to the GPRS GSM ciphering key
(in case of a GSM authentication challenge) or the GPRS UMTS ciphering
key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key (in case of a UMTS authentication
challenge) which may be computed from the RAND parameter carried in that
message.

If an authentication and ciphering procedure has been completed
successfully and a GPRS ciphering key sequence number is stored in the
network, the network shall include a different GPRS ciphering key
sequence number in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message when
it intiates a new authentication and ciphering procedure.

If a GPRS ciphering key sequence number is contained in the first
message during a GMM procedure, the network shall include a different
GPRS ciphering key sequence number in the AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING
REQUEST message when it initiates an authentication and ciphering
procedure.

The MS stores the GPRS ciphering key sequence number with the GPRS GSM
ciphering key (in case of a GSM authentication challenge) and the GPRS
UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key (in case of a UMTS
authentication challenge), and includes the corresponding GPRS ciphering
key sequence number in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST, SERVICE REQUEST
and ATTACH REQUEST messages.

If the GPRS ciphering key sequence number is deleted, the associated
GPRS GSM ciphering key, GPRS UMTS ciphering key, GPRS UMTS integrity
key, GPRS GSM Kc~128~ and GPRS GSM Kint shall be deleted if any (i.e.
the established GSM security context or the UMTS security context is no
longer valid).

In Iu mode, the network may choose to start ciphering and integrity
checking with the stored GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the stored GPRS
UMTS integrity key (under the restrictions given in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\]
and 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]) if the stored GPRS ciphering key sequence
number and the one given from the MS are equal.

In A/Gb mode, the network may choose to start ciphering with the stored
GPRS GSM ciphering key or GPRS GSM Kc~128~ (under the restrictions given
in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\]) if the stored GPRS ciphering key sequence
number and the one given from the MS are equal and the previously
negotiated ciphering algorithm is known and supported in the network.
When ciphering is requested at GPRS attach, the authentication and
ciphering procedure shall be performed since the MS does not store the
ciphering algorithm after entering state GMM-DEREGISTERED.

NOTE 1: The decision of starting ciphering with the GPRS GSM ciphering
key or the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ depends on whether the network indicates in
the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message a GEA ciphering
algorithm which requires a 64 or 128-bit ciphering key as specified in
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In A/Gb mode, if MS indicates support of integrity protection in the MS
network capability IE to the network, if the ME has a Integrity
Algorithm IE and a Ciphering Algorithm IE stored in the ME non-volatile
memory at MS power on, then the GMM layer shall calculate a GPRS GSM
Kint key as described in subclause 4.7.7.3b and a GPRS GSM Kc~128~ key
as described in subclause 4.7.7.3a and indicate to the LLC layer before
sending the ATTACH REQUEST message that LLC layer shall start integrity
protection with the indicated GPRS GSM Kint key and the integrity
algorithm (indicated in the stored Integrity Algorithm IE). The GMM
layer shall also assign the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ key and the ciphering
algorithm (indicated in the stored Ciphering Algorithm IE) to the LLC
layer. The network shall start integrity protection in the LLC layer
after reception of the ATTACH REQUEST message with the stored GPRS GSM
Kint and the integrity algorithm identified by the stored GPRS
GSMintegrity algorithm used when UE was previously attached if the GPRS
GSMintegrity algorithm is known and supported in the network, and if the
stored GPRS ciphering key sequence number and the one given from the MS
are equal.

Upon GPRS attach, if ciphering is to be used, an AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING REQUEST message shall be sent to the MS to start ciphering. In
A/Gb mode, upon GPRS attach, if the MS and network supports integrity
protection, then the network may choose to start ciphering with the
stored GPRS GSM ciphering key or GPRS GSM Kc~128~ (under the
restrictions given in 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\]) if the stored GPRS ciphering
key sequence number and the one given from the MS in the ATTACH REQUEST
message or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message are equal and the
previously negotiated ciphering algorithm is known and supported in the
network, without initiating a authentication and ciphering procedure.

If the GPRS ciphering key sequence number stored in the network does not
match the GPRS ciphering key sequence number received from the MS in the
ATTACH REQUEST message, then the network should authenticate the MS.

In A/Gb mode, the MS starts ciphering after sending the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message. The network starts ciphering when a
valid AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE is received from the MS.

In Iu mode, the MS starts ciphering and integrity checking according to
the conditions specified in specification 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].

In A/Gb mode, as an option, the network may decide to continue ciphering
without sending an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message after
receiving a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message with a valid GPRS
ciphering key sequence number. Both the MS and the network shall use the
latest ciphering parameters. The network starts ciphering when sending
the ciphered ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message to the MS. The MS starts
ciphering after receiving a valid ciphered ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT
message from the network.

NOTE 2: In some specifications the term KSI (Key Set Identifier) is used
instead of the term GPRS ciphering key sequence number.

#### 4.7.7.5 Authentication not accepted by the network

If the authentication response (RES or SRES) is not valid, the network
response depends upon the type of identity used by the MS in the first
message:

\- If the P-TMSI has been used, the network may decide to initiate the
identification procedure. If the IMSI given by the MS differs from the
one the network had associated with the P-TMSI, the authentication
should be restarted with the correct parameters. If the IMSI provided by
the MS is the expected one (i.e. authentication has really failed), the
network should send an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message to
the mobile station.

\- If the IMSI has been used, or the network decides not to try the
identification procedure, an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message
should be transferred to the MS.

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message,

a\) if the message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower
layers, the MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT
ALLOWED and shall delete the P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number stored. If available, also the TMSI, LAI
and ciphering key sequence number shall be deleted and the update status
shall be set to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED. The SIM/USIM shall be considered
as invalid until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the MS
maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value. If the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

If S1 mode is supported by the MS, the MS shall in addition handle the
EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, GUTI and KSI~ASME~ as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]
for the case when an EPS authentication is not accepted by the network.

b\) if the message is received without integrity protection, then the MS
shall start timer T3247 with a random value uniformly drawn from the
range between 30 minutes and 60 minutes, if the timer is not running
(see subclause 4.1.1.6A). Additionally, the MS shall:

\- if the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for
GPRS services\" events and the counter has a value less than an MS
implementation-specific maximum value, proceed as specified in
subclause 4.1.1.6A, list item 6.a) for the case an ATTACH REJECT or
ROUTING AREA UPDATE REJECT message is received without integrity
protection; and

\- otherwise proceed as specified under list item a) above for the case
that the message has been successfully checked by the lower layers.

List item b) above is also applicable, if the message is received in
A/Gb mode.

If the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message is received, the MS
shall abort any GMM procedure, shall stop the timers T3310, T3317,
T3330, T3318 or T3320 (if they were running) and shall enter state
GMM-DEREGISTERED.

In UTRAN Iu mode, depending on local regulations or operator preference
for emergency bearer services, if the MS has a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services established or is establishing a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services, the SGSN need not follow the
procedures specified for the authentication failure in the present
subclause, the SGSN can continue with the ongoing GMM specific procedure
or Session Management procedure. Upon completion of the GMM procedure or
Session management procedure, the SGSN shall deactivate all
non-emergency PDP contexts, if any, by initiating a PDP context
deactivation procedure. The network shall consider the MS to be attached
for emergency bearer services only.

##### 4.7.7.5.1 Authentication not accepted by the MS

In a UMTS authentication challenge, the authentication procedure is
extended to allow the MS to check the authenticity of the core network.
Thus allowing, for instance, detection of false base station.

Following a UMTS authentication challenge, the MS may reject the core
network, on the grounds of an incorrect AUTN parameter (see
3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). This parameter contains two possible causes for
authentication failure:

a\) MAC code failure

If the MS considers the MAC code (supplied by the core network in the
AUTN parameter) to be invalid, it shall send a AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING FAILURE message to the network, with the GMM cause \'MAC
failure\'. The MS shall then follow the procedure described in
subclause 4.7.7.6 (f).

b\) SQN failure

If the MS considers the SQN (supplied by the core network in the AUTN
parameter) to be out of range, it shall send a AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING FAILURE message to the network, with the GMM cause \'Synch
failure\' and the re-synchronization token AUTS provided by the USIM
(see 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]). The MS shall then follow the procedure
described in subclause 4.7.7.6 (g).

In Iu mode, an MSwith a USIM inserted shall reject the authentication
challenge if no Authentication Parameter AUTN IE was present in the
AUTHENTICATION REQUEST message (i.e. a GSM authentication challenge has
been received when the MS expects a UMTS authentication challenge). In
such a case, the MS shall send the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE
message to the network, with the GMM cause 'GSM authentication
unacceptable'. The MS shall then follow the procedure described in
subclause 4.7.7.6 (f).

If the MS returns an AUTHENTICATION\_AND\_CIPHERING\_FAILURE message to
the network, the MS shall delete any previously stored RAND and RES and
shall stop timer T3316, if running.

If the MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services established
or is establishing such a PDN connection, additional MS requirements are
specified in subclause 4.7.7.6, under \"for items f and g\".

#### 4.7.7.6 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Lower layer failure

Upon detection of a lower layer failure before the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message is received, the network shall abort the
procedure.

b\) Expiry of timer T3360

The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3360, retransmit
the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message and shall reset and
start timer T3360. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on
the fifth expiry of timer T3360, the procedure shall be aborted.

c\) Collision of an authentication and ciphering procedure with a GPRS
attach procedure

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
authentication procedure has been completed and no GPRS attach procedure
is pending on the network (i.e. no ATTACH ACCEPT/REJECT message has to
be sent as an answer to an ATTACH REQUEST message), the network shall
abort the authentication and ciphering procedure and proceed with the
new GPRS attach procedure.

d\) Collision of an authentication and ciphering procedure with a GPRS
attach procedure when the authentication and ciphering procedure has
been caused by a previous GPRS attach procedure

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
authentication procedure has been completed and a GPRS attach procedure
is pending (i.e. an ATTACH ACCEPT/REJECT message has still to be sent as
an answer to an earlier ATTACH REQUEST message), then:

\- If one or more of the information elements in the ATTACH REQUEST
message differs from the ones received within the previous ATTACH
REQUEST message, the network shall not treat the authentication any
further and proceed with the GPRS attach procedure; or

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the network shall not
treat any further this new ATTACH REQUEST message.

d1) Collision of an authentication and ciphering procedure with a GPRS
detach procedure

GPRS detach containing cause \"power off\":

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
authentication and ciphering procedure has been completed, the network
shall abort the authentication and ciphering procedure and shall
progress the GPRS detach procedure.

GPRS detach containing other causes than \"power off\":

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
authentication and ciphering procedure has been completed, the network
shall complete the authentication and ciphering procedure and shall
respond to the GPRS detach procedure as described in subclause 4.7.4.

e\) Collision of an authentication and ciphering procedure with a routing
area updating procedure

If the network receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message before the
ongoing authentication procedure has been completed, the network shall
progress both procedures.

![](media/image18.emf){width="5.611111111111111in"
height="1.8194444444444444in"}

Figure 4.7.7/1 3GPP TS 24.008: Authentication and ciphering procedure

\(f) Authentication failure (GMM cause \#18 \"MAC failure\" or \#21 \"GSM
authentication unacceptable\")

The MS shall send an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE message, with
GMM cause 'MAC failure' or 'GSM authentication unacceptable' according
to subclause 4.7.7.5.1, to the network and start timer T3318.
Furthermore, the MS shall stop any of the retransmission timers that are
running (e.g. T3310, T3321, T3330 or T3317). Upon the first receipt of
an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE message from the MS with GMM
cause 'MAC failure' or 'GSM authentication unacceptable' the network may
initiate the identification procedure described in subclause 4.7.8. This
is to allow the network to obtain the IMSI from the MS. The network may
then check that the P-TMSI originally used in the authentication
challenge corresponded to the correct IMSI. Upon receipt of the IDENTITY
REQUEST message from the network, the MS shall send the IDENTITY
RESPONSE message.

NOTE: Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE message
from the MS with reject cause \"MAC failure\" or \"GSM authentication
unacceptable\", the network may also terminate the authentication
procedure (see subclause 4.7.7.5).

If the P-TMSI/IMSI mapping in the network was incorrect, the network
should respond by sending a new AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message to the MS. Upon receiving the new AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
REQUEST message from the network, the MS shall stop timer T3318, if
running, and then process the challenge information as normal. If the
P-TMSI/IMSI mapping in the network was correct, the network should
terminate the authentication and ciphering procedure by sending an
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message.

If the network is validated successfully (an AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING REQUEST message that contains a valid SQN and MAC is
received), the MS shall send the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE
message to the network and shall start any retransmission timers (e.g.
T3310, T3321, T3330 or T3317), if they were running and stopped when the
MS received the first failed AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message.

If the MS receives the second AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message while T3318 is running and

\- the MAC value cannot be resolved; or

\- the message was received in UMTS and contains a GSM authentication
challenge,

the MS shall follow the procedure specified in this subclause (f),
starting again from the beginning. If the SQN is invalid, the MS shall
proceed as specified in (g).

It can be assumed that the source of the authentication challenge is not
genuine (authentication not accepted by the MS) if any of the following
occurs:

\- the timer T3318 expires;

\- the MS detects any combination of the authentication failures: \"MAC
failure\", \"invalid SQN\", and \"GSM authentication unacceptable\",
during three consecutive authentication challenges. The authentication
challenges shall be considered as consecutive only, if the
authentication challenges causing the second and third authentication
failure are received by the MS, while the timer T3318 or T3320 started
after the previous authentication failure is running.

The MS shall stop timer T3318, if the timer is running and the MS
detects a lower layer failure, the network releases the PS signalling
connection, the MS performs inter-system change to S1 mode, or the MS
initiates a GPRS suspension procedure (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]).

When it has been deemed by the MS that the source of the authentication
challenge is not genuine (authentication not accepted by the MS), the MS
shall behave as described in subclause 4.7.7.6.1.

Figure 4.7.7a/1 3GPP TS 24.008: Authentication failure cause \"MAC
failure\" or \"GSM authentication unacceptable\"

\(g) Authentication failure (GMM cause \#19 \"Synch failure\"):

The MS shall send an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE message, with
the GMM cause \"Synch failure\", to the network and start the timer
T3320. Furthermore, the MS shall stop any of the retransmission timers
that are running (e.g. T3310, T3321, T3330 or T3317). Upon the first
receipt of an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING message from the MS with the
GMM cause \"synch failure\", the network shall use the returned AUTS
parameter from the authentication & ciphering failure parameter IE in
the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING FAILURE message, to re-synchronise. The
re-synchronisation procedure requires the SGSN to delete all unused
authentication vectors for that IMSI and obtain new vectors from the
HLR. When re-synchronisation is complete, the network shall initiate the
authentication & ciphering procedure. Upon receipt of the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message, the MS shall stop timer T3320, if
running.

NOTE: Upon receipt of two consecutive AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
FAILURE messages from the MS with reject cause \"synch failure\", the
network may terminate the authentication procedure by sending an
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message.

If the network is validated successfully (a new AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING REQUEST message is received which contains a valid SQN and
MAC) while T3320 is running, the MS shall send the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message to the network and shall start any
retransmission timers (i.e. T3310, T3321, T3330 or T3317), if they were
running and stopped when the MS received the first failed AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message.

If the MS receives the second AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message while T3320 is running and

\- the MAC value cannot be resolved; or

\- the message was received in Iu mode and contains a GSM authentication
challenge,

the MS shall proceed as specified in (f). If the SQN is invalid, the MS
shall follow the procedure specified in this subclause (g), starting
again from the beginning.

The MS shall deem that the network has failed the authentication check
and behave as described in subclause 4.7.7.6.1, if any of the following
occurs:

\- the timer T3320 expires;

\- the MS detects any combination of the authentication failures: \"MAC
failure\", \"invalid SQN\", and \"GSM authentication unacceptable\",
during three consecutive authentication challenges. The authentication
challenges shall be considered as consecutive only, if the
authentication challenges causing the second and third authentication
failure are received by the MS, while the timer T3318 or T3320 started
after the previous authentication failure is running.

The MS shall stop timer T3320, if the timer is running and the MS
detects a lower layer failure, the network releases the PS signalling
connection, the MS performs inter-system change to S1 mode, or the MS
initiates a GPRS suspension procedure (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]).

When it has been deemed by the MS that the source of the authentication
challenge is not genuine (authentication not accepted by the MS), the MS
shall behave as described in subclause 4.7.7.6.1.

![](media/image20.emf){width="5.611111111111111in"
height="2.5555555555555554in"}

Figure 4.7.7b/1 3GPP TS 24.008: Authentication failure cause 'Synch
failure'

Upon receipt of an AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REJECT message, the UE
shall perform the actions as specified in subclause 4.7.7.5.

For items f and g:

Depending on local requirements or operator preference for emergency
bearer services, if the MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer
services established or is establishing such a PDN connection, the SGSN
need not follow the procedures specified for the authentication failure
specified in the present subclause and shall continue using the current
security context, if any. The SGSN shall deactivate all non-emergency
PDP contexts, if any, by initiating a PDP context deactivation
procedure. If there is an ongoing session management procedure, the SGSN
shall deactivate all non-emergency PDP contexts upon completion of the
session management procedure. The network shall consider the MS to be
attached for emergency bearer services only.

If an MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services established
or is establishing such a PDN connection when timer T3318 or T3320
expires, the MS shall not deem that the network has failed the
authentication check and not behave as described in subclause 4.7.7.6.1.
Instead the MS shall continue using the current security context, if
any. The MS shall deactivate all non-emergency PDP contexts, if any, by
initiating a PDP context deactivation procedure. If there is an ongoing
session management procedure, the MS shall deactivate all non-emergency
PDP contexts upon completion of the session management procedure. The MS
shall start any retransmission timers (e.g. T3310, T3317, T3321 or
T3330) if:

\- they were running and stopped when the MS received the AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REJECT message and detected an authentication failure; and

\- the procedures associated with these timers have not yet been
completed.

The MS shall consider itself to be attached for emergency bearer
services only.

##### 4.7.7.6.1 MS behaviour towards a network that has failed the authentication procedure

If the MS deems that the network has failed the authentication check,
then it shall request RR or RRC to release the RR connection and the PS
signalling connection, if any, and bar the active cell or cells (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\]). The MS shall start
any retransmission timers (i.e. T3310, T3321, T3330 or T3317), if they
were running and stopped when the MS received the first AUTHENTICATION
AND CIPHERING REQUEST message containing an invalid MAC or invalid SQN,
or no AUTN when a UMTS authentication challenge was expected.

#### 4.7.7.7 Use of established security contexts

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established GSM security context, the
GPRS GSM ciphering key shall be taken into use by the MS before the
AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING RESPONSE message is transmitted.

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, and
if the network indicates in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message to the MS that a GEA ciphering algorithm that requires a 64-bit
ciphering key shall be taken into use, then the GPRS GSM ciphering key
shall be taken into use by the MS before the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message is transmitted. The network shall derive a
GPRS GSM ciphering key from the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS
UMTS integrity key, by using the conversion function named \"c3\"
defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, and
if the network indicates in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message to the MS that a GEA ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit
ciphering key shall be taken into use, then the MS shall take the
following actions:

\- if authentication is not requested and a GEA ciphering algorithm that
requires 64-bit ciphering key is in use, the MS shall take into use the
GPRS GSM Kc~128~ derived by the ME from the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and
GPRS UMTS integrity key of the established UMTS security context in use
(see 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]) before the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
RESPONSE message is transmitted;.

\- if authentication is not requested and a GEA ciphering algorithm that
requires 128-bit ciphering key is in use, the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ of the
established UMTS security context in use still applies;

otherwise, the MS shall take into use the GPRS GSM Kc~128~ derived by
the ME from the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key
provided by the USIM during the latest successful authentication
procedure (see subclause 4.7.7.3a) before the AUTHENTICATION AND
CIPHERING RESPONSE message is transmitted.

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, and
if the network indicates in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message to the MS that a GEA ciphering algorithm that requires a 128-bit
ciphering key shall be taken into use, then the network shall derive a
GPRS GSM Kc~128~ (see subclause 4.7.7.3a).

In A/Gb mode, if an established UMTS security context context is
available in the network, if the MS indicates support of integrity
protection to the network and the network supports integrity protection,
if the network indicates in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message to the MS that a new GPRS GSM integrity algorithm shall be taken
into use but no authentication is requested, then the GPRS GSM Kint of
the established UMTS security context in use still applies in the MS and
network.

In A/Gb mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, and
if the network indicates in the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST
message to the MS that a GIA integrity protection algorithm that
requires a 128-bit integrity key shall be taken into use but no
authentication is requested, then the GPRS GSM Kint of the established
UMTS security context in use still applies in the MS.

In A/Gb mode, if during an ongoing, already ciphering protected RR
connection, the network initiates a new Authentication and ciphering
procedure, the new GPRS GSM ciphering key or GPRS GSM Kc~128~ shall be
taken into use by the MS before the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
RESPONSE message is transmitted. In case of inter-system change to Iu
mode after receipt of the AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING REQUEST message,
the MS and the network shall take the new keys into use immediately
after the inter-system change.

In Iu mode, in the case of an established GSM security context, the ME
shall derive a GPRS UMTS ciphering key and a GPRS UMTS integrity key
from the GPRS GSM ciphering key by using the conversion functions named
\"c4\" and \"c5\" defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]. The derived GPRS
UMTS ciphering key and GPRS UMTS integrity key shall be taken into use
by the MS when a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND message indicating PS
domain is received during an RR connection (the definition of a valid
SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is given in 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]). The
network shall derive a GPRS UMTS ciphering key and a GPRS UMTS integrity
key from the GPRS GSM ciphering key by using the conversion functions
named \"c4\" and \"c5\" defined in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

In Iu mode, in the case of an established UMTS security context, the
GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key shall be taken
into use by the MS when a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND message indicating
PS domain is received during a PS signalling connection (the definition
of a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND message is given in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

In Iu mode, if the MS received a valid SECURITY MODE COMMAND message
indicating PS domain in Iu mode or a valid AUTHENTICATION AND CIPHERING
REQUEST message in A/Gb mode before the network initiates a new
authentication and ciphering procedure and establishes a new GSM/UMTS
security context, the new GPRS UMTS ciphering key and GPRS UMTS
integrity key are taken into use by the MS, when a new valid SECURITY
MODE COMMAND message indicating PS domain is received during the PS
signalling connection. In case of inter-system change to A/Gb mode, the
MS and the network shall take the new keys into use immediately after
the inter-system change.

#### 4.7.7.8 Handling of keys at intersystem change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode

At an inter-system change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode, ciphering may be
started (see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]) without any new authentication and
ciphering procedure. Deduction of the appropriate security key for
ciphering in A/Gb mode, depends on the current GSM/UMTS security context
stored in the MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the GPRS GSM ciphering key and a potential GPRS GSM
Kc~128~ according to table 4.7.7.8.1.

In the case of an established GSM security context, before any initial
GMM message is sent in the new cell in A/Gb mode, the GMM layer in the
MS shall notify the LLC layer if ciphering shall be used or not. If
ciphering shall be used, then the GPRS GSM ciphering key and the
applicable GEA ciphering algorithm according to the stored *Ciphering
Algorithm IE* in the MS shall also be indicated to the LLC layer (see
3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]).

In the case of an established UMTS security context, before any initial
GMM message is sent in the new cell in A/Gb mode, the GMM layer in the
MS shall notify the LLC layer if ciphering shall be used or not. If
ciphering shall be used, then the GPRS GSM ciphering key or GPRS GSM
Kc~128~ and the applicable GEA ciphering algorithm according to the
stored *Ciphering Algorithm IE* in the MS shall also be indicated to the
LLC layer (see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]). If the network has selected a
GEA-algorithm that requires a 128-bit ciphering key, then the ME shall
apply a GPRS GSM Kc~128~ derived from the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and
the GPRS UMTS integrity key of the established UTMS security context as
specified in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].

Table 4.7.7.8.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from Iu mode to A/Gb
mode

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Security context established in   | At inter-system change to A/Gb    |
| MS and network in Iu mode         | mode:                             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| GSM security context              | An ME shall apply the GPRS GSM    |
|                                   | ciphering key that was received   |
|                                   | from the GSM security context     |
|                                   | created in the SIM/USIM during    |
|                                   | the latest successful             |
|                                   | authentication procedure.         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| UMTS security context             | If a GEA algorithm is taken into  |
|                                   | use that requires a 64-bit long   |
|                                   | ciphering key, then an ME shall   |
|                                   | apply the GPRS GSM ciphering key  |
|                                   | that was derived by the USIM from |
|                                   | the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and   |
|                                   | the GPRS UMTS integrity key       |
|                                   | during the latest successful      |
|                                   | authentication procedure.         |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | If a GEA algorithm is taken into  |
|                                   | use that requires a 128-bit       |
|                                   | ciphering key, then an ME shall   |
|                                   | apply the GPRS GSM Kc~128~        |
|                                   | derived by the ME from the GPRS   |
|                                   | UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS   |
|                                   | UMTS integrity key (see           |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]) provided   |
|                                   | by the USIM during the lastest    |
|                                   | successful authentication         |
|                                   | procedure (see                    |
|                                   | subclause 4.7.7.3a).              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

NOTE: A USIM with UMTS security context, passes the GPRS UMTS ciphering
key, the GPRS UMTS integrity key and the derived GPRS GSM ciphering key
to the ME independent on the current radio access being UTRAN or GERAN.

#### 4.7.7.9 Handling of keys at intersystem change from A/Gb mode to Iu mode

At an inter-system change from A/Gb mode to Iu mode, ciphering and
integrity may be started (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) without any new
authentication and ciphering procedure. Deduction of the appropriate
security keys for ciphering and integrity check in Iu mode, depends on
the current GSM/UMTS security context stored in the MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS
integrity key according to table 4.7.7.9.1.

Table 4.7.7.9.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from A/Gb mode to Iu
mode

  ------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Security context established in MS and network in A/Gb mode   At inter-system change to Iu mode:
  GSM security context                                          An ME shall derive the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key from the GPRS GSM ciphering key that was provided by the SIM/USIM during the latest successful authentication procedure. The conversion functions named \"c4\" and \"c5\" in 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\] are used for this purpose.
  UMTS security context                                         An ME shall apply the GPRS UMTS ciphering key and the GPRS UMTS integrity key that were received from the UMTS security context created in the USIM during the latest successful authentication procedure.
  ------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE: A USIM with UMTS security context, passes the GPRS UMTS ciphering
key, the GPRS UMTS integrity key and the derived GPRS GSM ciphering key
to the ME independent on the current radio access being UTRAN or GERAN.

#### 4.7.7.10 Handling of keys at intersystem change from S1 mode to Iu mode or A/Gb mode

At an inter-system change from S1 mode to Iu mode, ciphering and
integrity may be started (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]) without any new
authentication and ciphering procedure. At an inter-system change from
S1 mode to A/Gb mode, ciphering may be started (see
3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\]) without any new authentication and ciphering
procedure. Deduction of the appropriate security keys for ciphering and
integrity check in Iu mode or for ciphering in A/Gb mode, depends on the
current EPS security context or the UMTS security context for the PS
domain stored in the MS and the network.

The ME shall handle the GPRS UMTS ciphering key, the GPRS UMTS integrity
key, the GPRS GSM ciphering key and a potential GPRS GSM Kc~128~
according to table 4.7.7.10.1, table 4.7.7.10.2 and table 4.7.7.10.3.

Table 4.7.7.10.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from S1 mode to Iu
mode or A/Gb mode in connected mode.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Security context established in   | At inter-system change to Iu mode |
| MS and network                    | or A/Gb mode in connected mode    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| EPS security context              | An ME shall derive the UMTS       |
|                                   | security keys GPRS UMTS ciphering |
|                                   | key (CK\') and GPRS UMTS          |
|                                   | integrity key (IK\') from K~ASME~ |
|                                   | and the NAS downlink COUNT value  |
|                                   | as specified in                   |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.401 \[123\]. The ME    |
|                                   | shall use the derived UMTS        |
|                                   | security keys to derive the GPRS  |
|                                   | GSM ciphering key using the       |
|                                   | \"c3\" conversion function as     |
|                                   | specified in                      |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to Iu mode, the ME shall     |
|                                   | apply the new derived GPRS UMTS   |
|                                   | integrity key and GPRS UMTS       |
|                                   | ciphering key.                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, the ME shall   |
|                                   | apply the new derived GPRS GSM    |
|                                   | ciphering key.                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Furthermore, the ME shall replace |
|                                   | an already established UMTS       |
|                                   | security context for the PS       |
|                                   | domain, if any, in the USIM. The  |
|                                   | MS shall in addition handle the   |
|                                   | START~PS~ value as specified in   |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].           |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, if a GEA       |
|                                   | algorithm is taken into use that  |
|                                   | requires a 64-bit long ciphering  |
|                                   | key, then an ME shall apply the   |
|                                   | derived GPRS GSM ciphering key.   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, if a GEA       |
|                                   | algorithm is taken into use that  |
|                                   | requires a 128-bit long ciphering |
|                                   | key, then an ME shall apply the   |
|                                   | derived GPRS GSM Kc~128~ that was |
|                                   | derived by the ME from the        |
|                                   | derived UMTS security keys (see   |
|                                   | subclause 4.7.7.3a).              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

NOTE 1: For the case in table 4.7.7.10.1, because of deriving a new UMTS
security context for the PS domain, a new GPRS GSM ciphering key needs
to be derived from the new derived UMTS security keys (i.e. CK\' and
IK\'). Note that the new GPRS GSM ciphering key is also part of the new
UMTS security context for the PS domain, and therefore any old GPRS GSM
ciphering key stored in the USIM and in the ME belongs to an old UMTS
security context for the PS domain and can no longer be taken into use.

Table 4.7.7.10.2/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from S1 mode to Iu
mode or A/Gb mode in idle mode when the TIN indicates \"GUTI\".

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Security context established in   | At inter-system change to Iu mode |
| MS and network                    | or A/Gb mode in idle mode when    |
|                                   | the TIN indicates \"GUTI\"        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| EPS security context              | An ME shall derive the UMTS       |
|                                   | security keys GPRS UMTS ciphering |
|                                   | key (CK\') and GPRS UMTS          |
|                                   | integrity key (IK\') from K~ASME~ |
|                                   | and the NAS uplink COUNT value as |
|                                   | specified in                      |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.401 \[123\]. The ME    |
|                                   | shall use the derived UMTS        |
|                                   | security keys to derive the GPRS  |
|                                   | GSM ciphering key using the       |
|                                   | \"c3\" conversion function as     |
|                                   | specified in                      |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\].            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to Iu mode, the ME shall     |
|                                   | apply the new derived GPRS UMTS   |
|                                   | integrity key and GPRS UMTS       |
|                                   | ciphering key.                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, the ME shall   |
|                                   | apply the new derived GPRS GSM    |
|                                   | ciphering key.                    |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Furthermore, the ME shall replace |
|                                   | an already established UMTS       |
|                                   | security context for the PS       |
|                                   | domain, if any, in the USIM. The  |
|                                   | MS shall in addition handle the   |
|                                   | START~PS~ value as specified in   |
|                                   | 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\].           |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, if a GEA       |
|                                   | algorithm is taken into use that  |
|                                   | requires a 64-bit long ciphering  |
|                                   | key, then an ME shall apply the   |
|                                   | derived GPRS GSM ciphering key.   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, if a GEA       |
|                                   | algorithm is taken into use that  |
|                                   | requires a 128-bit long ciphering |
|                                   | key, then an ME shall apply the   |
|                                   | derived GPRS GSM Kc~128~ that was |
|                                   | derived by the ME from the        |
|                                   | derived UMTS security keys (see   |
|                                   | subclause 4.7.7.3a).              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

NOTE 2: For the case in table 4.7.7.10.2, because of deriving a new UMTS
security context for the PS domain, a new GPRS GSM ciphering key needs
to be derived from the new derived UMTS security keys (i.e. CK\' and
IK\'). The new GPRS GSM ciphering key is also part of the new UMTS
security context for the PS domain, and therefore any old GPRS GSM
ciphering key stored in the USIM and in the ME belongs to an old UMTS
security context for the PS domain and can no longer be taken into use.

Table 4.7.7.10.3/3GPP TS 24.008: Inter-system change from S1 mode to Iu
mode or A/Gb mode in idle mode when the TIN indicates \"RAT‑related
TMSI\"

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Security context established in   | At inter-system change to Iu mode |
| MS and network                    | or A/Gb mode in idle mode when    |
|                                   | the TIN indicates \"RAT‑related   |
|                                   | TMSI\"                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| UMTS security context             | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to Iu mode, the ME shall     |
|                                   | apply the GPRS UMTS ciphering key |
|                                   | and the GPRS UMTS integrity key   |
|                                   | that were received from the UMTS  |
|                                   | security context for the PS       |
|                                   | domain created in the USIM during |
|                                   | the latest successful             |
|                                   | authentication procedure.         |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, if a GEA       |
|                                   | algorithm is taken into use that  |
|                                   | requires a 64-bit long ciphering  |
|                                   | key, then an ME shall apply the   |
|                                   | GPRS GSM ciphering key that was   |
|                                   | received from the GSM security    |
|                                   | context created in the SIM/USIM   |
|                                   | during the latest successful      |
|                                   | authentication procedure.         |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | At inter-system change from S1    |
|                                   | mode to A/Gb mode, if a GEA       |
|                                   | algorithm is taken into use that  |
|                                   | requires a 128-bit long ciphering |
|                                   | key, then an ME shall apply the   |
|                                   | GPRS GSM Kc~128~ derived by the   |
|                                   | ME from the GPRS UMTS ciphering   |
|                                   | key and the GPRS UMTS integrity   |
|                                   | key (see 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\])   |
|                                   | provided by the USIM during the   |
|                                   | lastest successful authentication |
|                                   | procedure (see                    |
|                                   | subclause 4.7.7.3a).              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The network shall replace an already established UMTS security context
for the PS domain, if any, when a handover from S1mode to Iu mode or
from S1mode to A/Gb mode has been completed successfully.

If the handover from S1mode to Iu mode or S1mode to A/Gb mode has not
been completed successfully, the ME and the network shall delete the new
derived UMTS security context for the PS domain. Additionally, the
network shall delete the already established UMTS security context for
the PS domain, if the CKSN of the already established UMTS security
context is equal to the CKSN of the new derived security context for the
PS domain.

### 4.7.8 Identification procedure

The identification procedure is used by the network to request an MS to
provide specific identification parameters to the network e.g.
International Mobile Subscriber Identity, International Mobile Equipment
Identity (see 3GPP TS 23.003 \[10\]). For the presentation of the IMEI,
the requirements of 3GPP TS 42.009 \[5\] apply.

#### 4.7.8.1 Identification initiation by the network

The network initiates the identification procedure by transferring an
IDENTITY REQUEST message to the MS and starts the timer T3370. The
IDENTITY REQUEST message specifies the requested identification
parameters in the identity type information element.

#### 4.7.8.2 Identification response by the MS

An MS shall be ready to respond to an IDENTITY REQUEST message at any
time.

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY REQUEST message the MS sends back an
IDENTITY RESPONSE message. The IDENTITY RESPONSE message shall contain
the identification parameters as requested by the network.

#### 4.7.8.3 Identification completion by the network

Upon receipt of the IDENTITY RESPONSE the network shall stop timer
T3370.

#### 4.7.8.3a Abnormal cases in the MS

\(a) Requested identity is not available:

If the MS cannot encode the requested identity in the IDENTITY RESPONSE
message, e.g. because no valid SIM is available, then it shall encode
the identity type as \"No identity\".

#### 4.7.8.4 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Lower layer failure

Upon detection of a lower layer failure before the IDENTITY RESPONSE is
received, the network shall abort any ongoing GMM procedure.

b\) Expiry of timer T3370

The identification procedure is supervised by the network by the timer
T3370. The network shall, on the first expiry of the timer T3370,
retransmit the IDENTITY REQUEST message and reset and restart the timer
T3370. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth
expiry of timer T3370, the network shall abort the identification
procedure and any ongoing GMM procedure.

c\) Collision of an identification procedure with a GPRS attach procedure

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
identification procedure has been completed and no GPRS attach procedure
is pending on the network (i.e. no ATTACH ACCEPT/REJECT message has
still to be sent as an answer to an ATTACH REQUEST message), the network
shall proceed with the GPRS attach procedure.

d\) Collision of an identification procedure with a GPRS attach procedure
when the identification procedure has been caused by a GPRS attach
procedure

If the network receives an ATTACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
identification procedure has been completed and a GPRS attach procedure
is pending (i.e. an ATTACH ACCEPT/REJECT message has to be sent as an
answer to an earlier ATTACH REQUEST message), then:

\- If one or more of the information elements in the ATTACH REQUEST
message differs from the ones received within the previous ATTACH
REQUEST message, the network shall proceed with the GPRS attach
procedure; or

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the network shall not
treat any further this new ATTACH REQUEST.

d1) Collision of an identification procedure with an MS initiated GPRS
detach procedure

GPRS detach containing cause \"power off\":

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
identification procedure has been completed, the network shall abort the
identification procedure and shall progress the GPRS detach procedure.

GPRS detach containing other causes than \"power off\":

If the network receives a DETACH REQUEST message before the ongoing
identification procedure has been completed, the network shall complete
the identification procedure and shall respond to the GPRS detach
procedure as described in subclause 4.7.4.

e\) Collision of an identification procedure with a routing area updating
procedure

If the network receives a ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message before the
ongoing identification procedure has been completed, the network shall
progress both procedures.

f\) Collision of an identification procedure with a service request
procedure

If the network receives a SERVICE REQUEST message before the ongoing
identification procedure has been completed, the network shall progress
both procedures.

![](media/image21.emf){width="5.611111111111111in"
height="1.3333333333333333in"}

Figure 4.7.8/1 3GPP TS 24.008: Identification procedure

### 4.7.9 Paging procedure

#### 4.7.9.1 Paging for GPRS services

In A/Gb mode, paging is used by the network to identify the cell the MS
has currently selected, or to prompt the mobile to re-attach if
necessary as a result of network failure. If the MS is not GPRS attached
when it receives a paging for GPRS services, the MS shall ignore the
paging.

In Iu mode, paging is used by the network to request the establishment
of PS signalling connection or to prompt the mobile to re-attach if
necessary as a result of network failure. If the MS is not GPRS attached
when it receives a paging for GPRS services, the MS shall ignore the
paging.

##### 4.7.9.1.1 Paging for GPRS services using P-TMSI

The network shall initiate the paging procedure for GPRS services using
P-TMSI when GMM signalling messages or user data is pending to be sent
to the MS while the mobile reachable timer is running. The network may
page only GPRS MSs which are GMM-REGISTERED and identified by a local
P-TMSI.

In Iu mode, for the MS using eDRX, the network initiates the paging
procedure when the paging trigger is received within the paging time
window. If the paging trigger is received outside the paging time
window, the network initiates the paging procedure at T time ahead of
the beginning of the next paging time window.

NOTE: T time is a short time period based on implementation. The
operator can take possible imperfections in the synchronization between
the CN and the MS into account when choosing T time.

In Iu mode, to initiate the procedure the GMM entity in the network
requests the lower layer to start paging (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]) and shall start the timer:

\- T3315 for this paging procedure, if the network accepted to use eDRX
for the MS.

\- Otherwise T3313 for this paging procedure.

In Iu mode, if the network starts the timer T3315, the network shall set
the timer T3315 to a value smaller than the value of timer T3-RESPONSE
(see 3GPP TS 29.274 \[16D\] for further details on timer T3-RESPONSE).

In Iu mode, the GMM entity in the network may provide the lower layer
with a list of CSG IDs, including the CSG IDs of both the expired and
the unexpired subscriptions. If there is a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services established, the GMM entity in the network shall not
provide the list of CSG IDs to the lower layer.

Upon reception of a paging indication, the MS shall stop the timer
T3346, if running, and:

\- initiate a service request procedure to respond to the paging, the MS
shall set the service type to \"paging response\" in the SERVICE REQUEST
message (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\], 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\],
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- initiate a routing area update procedure as specified in
subclauses 4.7.5.1 and 4.7.5.2.1.

If the paging request for GPRS services was received during an ongoing
MS initiated GMM specific procedure, then the MS shall progress the GMM
specific procedure, and the network shall proceed with the GMM specific
procedure.

In A/Gb mode, to initiate the procedure the GMM entity requests the RR
sublayer to start paging (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\],
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\]), and shall start the timer:

\- T3315 for this paging procedure, if the network accepted to use eDRX
for the MS.

\- Otherwise T3313 for this paging procedure.

In A/Gb mode, if the network starts the timer T3315, the network shall
set the timer T3315 to a value smaller than the value of timer
T3-RESPONSE (see 3GPP TS 29.274 \[16D\] for further details on timer
T3-RESPONSE).

In A/Gb mode, upon reception of a paging indication, the MS shall
respond to the paging with any LLC frame (see 3GPP TS 44.064 \[78a\],
3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\], 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

At intersystem change, an MS not having the READY timer running in A/Gb
mode or an MS in PMM-IDLE mode in Iu mode, being paged in a different
access network as when it last sent user data or signalling message,
uses the ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message as paging response, i.e.
the routing area updating procedure shall be performed instead according
to the selective routing area updating procedure.

The network shall stop the timer for the paging procedure (i.e. either
timer T3313 or timer T3315) when a response is received from the MS.

Upon expiry ofthe timer T3313, the network may re-initiate paging.

Upon expiry of the timer T3315, the network shall abort the paging
procedure and shall proceed as specified in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\].

In Iu mode, when a response is received from the MS, the network shall
change from PMM-IDLE mode to PMM-CONNECTED mode.

In A/Gb mode, when a response different from an LLC NULL frame is
received from the MS, the network shall start the READY timer.

##### 4.7.9.1.2 Paging for GPRS services using IMSI

Paging for GPRS services using IMSI is an abnormal procedure used for
error recovery in the network.

The network may initiate paging using IMSI if the P-TMSI is not
available due to a network failure.

In Iu mode, to initiate the procedure the GMM entity in the network
requests the lower layer to start paging (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]).

In A/Gb mode, to initiate the procedure the GMM entity in the network
requests the RR sublayer to start paging (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\],
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\]).

Upon reception of a paging indication for GPRS services using IMSI, the
MS shall stop the timer T3346, if it is running, locally deactivate any
active PDP context(s), MBMS context(s) and locally detach from GPRS. The
local detach includes deleting any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and
GPRS ciphering key sequence number stored, setting the GPRS update
status to GU2 NOT UPDATED and changing state to GMM-DEREGISTERED. The MS
shall stop all timers T3396 that are running.

If S1 mode is supported by the MS, the MS shall in addition handle the
EMM parameters EMM state, EPS update status, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list, GUTI and KSI~ASME~ as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]
for the case when a paging for EPS services using IMSI is received.

In Iu mode, when an MS receives a paging request for GPRS services using
the IMSI from the network before an MS initiated GMM specific procedure
has been completed, then the MS shall abort the GMM specific procedure,
and the MS shall proceed according to the description in this clause.

After performing the local detach, the MS shall then perform a GPRS
attach or combined GPRS attach procedure.

After performing the attach, the MS should activate PDP context(s) to
replace any previously active PDP context(s). The MS should also perform
the procedures needed in order to activate any previously active
multicast service(s).

NOTE 1: In some cases, user interaction may be required and then the MS
cannot activate the PDP and MBMS context(s) automatically.

NOTE 2: The MS does not respond to the paging except with the Attach
Request. Hence timers T3313 and T3315 in the network are not used when
paging with IMSI.

NOTE 3: Paging without DRX parameters may require a considerable
extension of the paging duration.

NOTE 4: Paging without using eDRX parameters may result in the paging
with IMSI not to be received by the MS for which eDRX has been
negotiated or may require a considerable extension of the paging
duration.

#### 4.7.9.2 Paging for non-GPRS services

The network may initiate the paging procedure for non-GPRS services when
the MS is IMSI attached for non-GPRS services.

In Iu mode, to initiate the procedure the GMM entity requests the lower
layer to start paging (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and
3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]) for non-GPRS services.

In A/Gb mode, to initiate the procedure the GMM entity requests the RR
sublayer to start paging (see 3GPP TS 44.018 \[84\] and
3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\] for non-GPRS services).

The MS identity used for paging shall be the allocated TMSI if
acknowledged by the MS, otherwise the IMSI.

### 4.7.10 Receiving a GMM STATUS message by a GMM entity

If the MS receives a GMM STATUS message no state transition and no
specific action shall be taken as seen from the radio interface, i.e.
local actions are possible. The actions to be taken on receiving a GMM
STATUS message in the network are an implementation dependent option.

### 4.7.11 Void

### 4.7.12 GMM Information procedure

The GMM information message support is optional in the network. The MM
information procedure may be invoked by the network at any time during
an established GMM context.

#### 4.7.12.1 GMM information procedure initiation by the network

The GMM information procedure consists only of the GMM INFORMATION
message sent from the network to the mobile station. During an
established GMM context, the network may send none, one, or more GMM
INFORMATION messages to the mobile station. If more than one GMM
INFORMATION message is sent, the messages need not have the same
content.

#### 4.7.12.2 GMM information procedure in the mobile station

When the mobile station (supporting the GMM information message)
receives an GMM INFORMATION message, it shall accept the message and
optionally use the contents to update appropriate information stored
within the mobile station.

If the mobile station does not support the GMM information message the
mobile station shall ignore the contents of the message and return an
GMM STATUS message with cause \#97.

### 4.7.13 Service Request procedure (Iu mode only)

The purpose of this procedure is to transfer the PMM mode from PMM-IDLE
to PMM-CONNECTED mode, and/or to assign radio access bearer in case of
PDP contexts are activated without radio access bearer assigned. In
latter case, the PMM mode may be PMM-IDLE mode or may alternatively be
the PMM-CONNECTED mode if the MS requires radio access bearer
re-establishment. This procedure is used for;

\- the initiation of CM layer service (e.g. SM or SMS) procedure from
the MS in PMM-IDLE mode,

\- the network to transfer down link signalling,

\- uplink (in PMM-IDLE or PMM CONNECTED) and downlink (only in PMM-IDLE)
user data,

\- counting the number of mobile stations in a cell which are interested
in a specific MBMS service.

\- requesting the establishment of a point-to-point Radio Bearer for
receiving a MBMS service.

For downlink transfer of signalling or user data in PMM-IDLE mode, the
trigger is given from the network by the paging request procedure, which
is out of scope of the present document.

For pending downlink user data in PMM-CONNECTED mode, the
re-establishment of radio access bearers for all active PDP contexts is
done without paging.

For counting the number of mobile stations in PMM-IDLE mode interested
in a specific MBMS service, the trigger is given from the network by the
MBMS notification procedure (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

For establishing a point-to-point radio bearer to allow MBMS service,
the trigger is given from the RRC determining this need from the MBMS
control parameters broadcasted by the network (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]).

Service type can take either of the following values; \"signalling\",
\"data\", \"paging response\", \"MBMS multicast service reception\" or
\"MBMS broadcast service reception\". Each of the values shall be
selected according to the criteria to initiate the Service request
procedure.

If the MS is triggered to send a Service Request message for both MBMS
multicast service and MBMS broadcast service simultaneously, the MS
shall include a Service Type indicating \"MBMS multicast service
reception\".

The criteria to invoke the Service request procedure are when:

a\) the MS has any signalling messages except GMM messages (e.g. for SM
or SMS) to be sent to the network in PMM-IDLE mode (i.e., no secure PS
signalling connection has been established). In this case, the service
type shall be set to \"signalling\".

b\) the MS, either in PMM-IDLE or PMM-CONNECTED mode, has pending user
data to be sent, no radio access bearer is established for the
corresponding PDP context, and timer T3319 (see subclause 4.7.13.3) is
not running or, optionally, if timer T3319 is running and the flag in
the Uplink data status IE for this PDP context has not been set in the
last Service Request. The procedure is initiated by an indication from
the lower layers (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]). In this case, the service
type shall be set to \"data\".

c\) the MS receives a paging request using P-TMSI for PS domain from the
network in PMM-IDLE mode. In this case, the service type shall be set to
\"paging response\".

d\) the MS is in PMM-IDLE mode or PMM-CONNECTED, receives an MBMS
notification for an MBMS multicast service for which the MS has
activated an MBMS context or for an MBMS broadcast service which has
been selected for reception locally by upper layers in the MS, and is
prompted by the contents of the notification to establish a PS
signalling connection (see 3GPP TS 25.346 \[110\]). In this case, the
service type shall be set to \"MBMS multicast service reception\" or
\"MBMS broadcast service reception\", respectively.

e\) the MS in PMM-IDLE mode or PMM-CONNECTED, determines from the
broadcast MBMS control parameters that there is a need to establish a
point-to-point Radio Bearer to enable MBMS reception (see
3GPP TS 25.346 \[110\]). In this case, the service type shall be set to
\"MBMS multicast service reception\" or \"MBMS broadcast service
reception\", respectively.

If one of the above criteria to invoke the Service request procedure is
fulfilled, then the Service request procedure may only be initiated by
the MS when the following conditions are fulfilled:

\- its GPRS update status is GU1 UPDATED and the stored RAI is equal to
the RAI of the current serving cell; and

\- no GMM specific procedure is ongoing (see subclause 4.1.1.1).

If a GMM specific procedure is ongoing at the time a request from CM
sublayer, the RRC or the RABM (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]) is received
and the ATTACH REQUEST or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message has been
sent, then, depending on implementation, the MS shall abort the received
request or delay it until the GMM specific procedure is completed. If
the ATTACH REQUEST or ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message has not been
sent, the MS may indicate \"follow-on request pending\" in the message
(i.e. the MS wishes to prolong the established PS signalling connection
after the GMM specific procedure). Then, the MS shall delay the Service
request procedure until the GMM specific procedure is completed.

If the network indicates \"follow-on proceed\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT or
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message and the MS has a service request
pending, the MS shall react depending on the service type. If the
service type is:

\- \"signalling\": the MS shall abort the Service request procedure and
send the pending signalling messages immediately;

\- \"data\": the MS shall immediately perform the pending Service
request procedure using the current PS signalling connection;

\- \"paging response\": the MS shall abort the Service request
procedure. No further specific action is required from the MS.

If the network indicates \"follow-on proceed\" and the MS has no service
request pending, then no specific action is required from the MS. As an
implementation option, the MS may start timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9 if no user plane radio access bearers are set up.

If the network indicates \"no follow-on proceed\" in the ATTACH ACCEPT
or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT message, the MS shall not initiate the
pending Service request procedure until the current PS signalling
connection is released.

NOTE: The \"follow-on proceed\" indication was not defined in earlier
versions of the protocol. A network that is compliant with the earlier
versions of the protocol will always encode the respective bit as zero,
i.e. as \"follow-on proceed\", even if it does not prolong the PS
signalling connection.

After completion of a Service request procedure but before
re-establishment of radio access bearer, if the PDP and MBMS context
status information elements are included, then the network shall
deactivate all those PDP and MBMS contexts locally (without peer to peer
signalling between the MS and the network), which are not in SM state
PDP-INACTIVE on network side but are indicated by the MS as being in
state PDP-INACTIVE.

After completion of a Service request procedure, the pending service is
resumed and uses then the connection established by the procedure. If
the service type is indicating \"data\", then the radio access bearers
for all activated PDP contexts are re-established by the network, except
for those activated PDP contexts having maximum bit rate value set to 0
kbit/s for both uplink and downlink and as an option those which have no
pending user data. The re-establishment of radio access bearers for
those PDP contexts is specified in subclause 6.1.3.3.

A service request attempt counter is used to limit the number of service
request attempts and no response from the network. The service request
attempt counter shall be incremented as specified in subclause 4.7.13.5.

The service request attempt counter shall be reset when:

\- an attach or combined attach procedure is successfully completed;

\- a normal or periodic routing area updating or a combined routing area
updating procedure is successfully completed; or

\- a service request procedure is successfully completed.

#### 4.7.13.1 Service Request procedure initiation

The MS initiates the Service request procedure by sending a SERVICE
REQUEST message. The timer T3317 shall be started after the SERVICE
REQUEST message has been sent and state GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED is
entered. The message SERVICE REQUEST shall contain the P-TMSI and the
Service type shall indicate either \"data\", \"signalling\", \"paging
response\", \"MBMS multicast service reception\" or \"MBMS broadcast
service reception\". The MS shall not issue another Service request when
the MS is in state GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED

If the PDP context status information element is included in the SERVICE
REQUEST message, then the network shall deactivate all those PDP
contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between the MS and the
network) which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE on the network side, but
are indicated by the MS as being in state PDP-INACTIVE.

If the MBMS context status information element is included in the
SERVICE REQUEST message, then the network shall deactivate all those
MBMS contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between the MS
and network) which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE on the network side,
but are indicated by the MS as being in state PDP-INACTIVE. If no MBMS
context status information element is included, then the network shall
deactivate all MBMS contexts locally which are not in SM state
PDP-INACTIVE on the network side.

For a Service Request of type \"data\", the MS may include the Uplink
data status information element in the SERVICE REQUEST message. The
Uplink data status information indicates which preserved PDP contexts
have pending uplink data to be sent. If the Uplink data status
information element is included in the SERVICE REQUEST message with
service type \"data\", the network may use this information to determine
which of the RABs for the preserved PDP contexts to re-establish.

#### 4.7.13.2 GMM common procedure initiation

The network may initiate GMM common procedures, e.g. the GMM
identification or the GMM authentication and ciphering procedure,
depending on the received information such as GPRS ciphering key
sequence number and P-TMSI.

#### 4.7.13.3 Service request procedure accepted by the network

If the SERVICE REQUEST message was sent in PMM-IDLE mode, the indication
from the lower layers that the security mode control procedure is
completed shall be treated as a successful completion of the procedure.
The service request attempt counter shall be reset, timer T3317 shall be
stopped, and the MS enters GMM-REGISTERED state and PMM-CONNECTED mode.

If the SERVICE REQUEST message was sent in PMM-CONNECTED mode, then the
reception of the SERVICE ACCEPT message shall be treated as a successful
completion of the procedure. The timer T3317 shall be stopped and the MS
remains in PMM-CONNECTED mode.

Upon reception of the SERVICE REQUEST message, if the EMM Combined UE
Waiting Flag is \'true\', the SGSN shall complete the procedure and
perform a detach procedure for non-GPRS services only as described in
subclause 4.7.4.2.

If the SERVICE REQUEST message was sent in a CSG cell and the CSG
subscription has expired or was removed for a MS, but the MS has a PDN
connection for emergency bearer services established, the network shall
accept the SERVICE REQUEST message and deactivate all non-emergency PDP
contexts by initiating PDP context deactivation procedure. The PDP
contexts for emergency services shall not be deactivated.

At successful completion of a service request procedure with Service
type \"data\", the MS shall start timer T3319. The timer T3319 shall be
stopped when the MS returns to PMM-IDLE mode or when the network
releases the radio access bearer of any active PDP context. The MS shall
not issue another Service Request with service type \"data\" while timer
T3319 is running unless the Service request is being generated from a
PDP context for which the flag in the Uplink data status IE has not been
set in the last Service Request.

The network may indicate a value for timer T3319 in the ATTACH ACCEPT or
ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT messages. The last provided value of T3319
shall be used by the MS. If the information element T3319 value is not
included in the ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATE ACCEPT messages,
the default value shall be used. If the T3319 value received by the MS
contains an indication that the timer is deactivated or the timer value
is zero, then the MS shall use the default value.

If the PDP context status information element is included in the Service
Accept, then the MS shall deactivate locally (without peer to peer
signalling between the MS and the network) all that PDP contexts which
are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE on MS side but are indicated by the
Network as being in state PDP-INACTIVE. If there is a default PDP
context among the PDP contexts to be deactivated, an MS supporting S1
mode shall locally deactivate all PDP contexts associated to the same
PDP address and APN as the default PDP context without peer-to-peer SM
signalling to the network; an MS not supporting S1 mode may apply the
same behaviour.

If the MBMS context status information element is included in the
SERVICE ACCEPT message, then the MS shall deactivate all those MBMS
contexts locally (without peer to peer signalling between the MS and
network) which are not in SM state PDP-INACTIVE in the MS, but are
indicated by the network as being in state PDP-INACTIVE. If no MBMS
context status information element is included, then the MS shall
deactivate all those MBMS contexts locally which are not in SM state
PDP-INACTIVE in the MS.

If a service request is received from an MS with a LIPA PDN connection,
and if:

\- a L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided by the lower layer
together with the service request, and the GGSN address associated with
the PDP context of the LIPA PDN connection is different from the
provided L-GW Transport Layer Address (see 3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- no L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided together with the service
request by the lower layer,

then the SGSN explicitly deactivates all PDP contexts associated with
the LIPA PDN connection by initiating the PDP context deactivation
procedure (see subclause 6.1.3.4.2).

If a service request is received from an MS with a SIPTO at the local
network PDN connection, the following different cases can be
distinguished:

1\) if the PDN connection is a SIPTO at the local network PDN connection
with collocated L-GW and if:

\- a SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided by the lower layer
together with the service request, and the GGSN address associated with
the PDP context of the SIPTO at the local network PDN connection is
different from the provided SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address (see
3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- no SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address is provided together with the
service request by the lower layer,

2\) if the PDN connection is a SIPTO at the local network PDN connection
with stand-alone GW and if:

\- a LHN-ID value is provided by the lower layer together with the
service request, and the LHN-ID stored in the PDP context of the SIPTO
at the local network PDN connection is different from the provided
LHN-ID value (see 3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\]); or

\- no LHN-ID value is provided together with the service request by the
lower layer,

then the SGSN explicitly deactivates all PDP contexts associated with
the SIPTO at the local network PDN connection by initiating the PDP
context deactivation procedure (see subclause 6.1.3.4.2).

#### 4.7.13.4 Service request procedure not accepted by the network

If the Service request cannot be accepted, the network returns a SERVICE
REJECT message to the mobile station.

Based on local policies or configurations in the network, if the network
determines to change the periodic routing area update timer (T3312), or
if the network determines to change the PSM usage or the value of the
timer T3324 in the MS for which PSM is allowed by the network, the
network may return a SERVICE REJECT with the cause \#10 \"implicitly
detached\" to the MS.

If the service request for mobile originated services is rejected due to
general NAS level mobility management congestion control, the network
shall set the GMM cause value to \#22 \"congestion\" and assign a
back-off timer T3346.

An MS that receives a SERVICE REJECT message containing a reject cause
other than GMM cause value \#25 or the message is integrity protected,
shall reset the service request attempt counter, shall stop the timer
T3317.

If the SERVICE REJECT message containing GMM cause value \#25 was
received without integrity protection, then the MS shall discard the
message.

The MS shall then take different actions depending on the received
reject cause value:

\# 3 (Illegal MS); or

\# 6 (Illegal ME);

\- The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), shall delete the
list of equivalent PLMNs and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED.
Furthermore, it shall delete any P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number and shall consider the SIM/USIM as invalid
for GPRS services until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the
message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and
the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS
services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

\- A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B shall in addition set
the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI
and ciphering key sequence number. If the MS is operating in MS
operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall abort the RR
connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The SIM/USIM shall be
considered as invalid also for non-GPRS services until switching off or
the SIM/USIM is removed or the timer T3245 expires as described in
subclause 4.1.1.6. If the message has been successfully integrity
checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS services\", then the MS shall
set this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 7 (GPRS services not allowed);

\- The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2.9) and shall delete
any P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence
number. The SIM/USIM shall be considered as invalid for GPRS services
until switching off or the SIM/USIM is removed. The new state is
GMM-DEREGISTERED. If the message has been successfully integrity checked
by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM
considered invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set this
counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services is still IMSI attached for CS services in the
network.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B in network operation
mode I shall then proceed with the appropriate MM specific procedure.

NOTE 1: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 8 (GPRS services and non-GPRS services not allowed);

The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and
shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall delete any
P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and GPRS ciphering key sequence number.
The new GMM state is GMM-DEREGISTERED.

The MS shall set the update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall
delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key sequence number. The MS shall
delete the list of equivalent PLMNs. If the MS is operating in MS
operation mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall abort the RR
connection, unless an emergency call is ongoing. The SIM/USIM shall be
considered as invalid for GPRS and non-GPRS services until switching off
or the SIM/USIM is removed. If the message has been successfully
integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS maintains a counter for
\"SIM/USIM considered invalid for GPRS services\", then the MS shall set
this counter to MS implementation-specific maximum value. If the message
has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and the MS
maintains a counter for \"SIM/USIM considered invalid for non-GPRS
services\", then the MS shall set this counter to MS
implementation-specific maximum value.

NOTE 2: Optionally the MS starts the timer T3340 as described in
subclause 4.7.1.9.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 9 (MS identity cannot be derived by the network);

\- The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU2 NOT UPDATED (and shall
store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2), enter the state
GMM-DEREGISTERED, and shall delete any P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature, RAI and
GPRS ciphering key sequence number. If the rejected request was not for
initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services, the MS may
subsequently, automatically initiate the GPRS attach procedure.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 10 (Implicitly detached);

\- A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode B in network operation mode
I is IMSI detached for both GPRS and CS services.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A in network operation mode I
is detached for GPRS services.If no RR connection exists then the MS is
also IMSI detached for the CS services.

\- The MS shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. If the
rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services, the MS shall then perform a new attach procedure. The
MS should also activate PDP context(s) that were originally activated by
the MS to replace any previously MS activated PDP context(s). The MS
should also perform the procedures needed in order to activate any
previously active multicast service(s).

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM state as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the the service
request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

NOTE 3: In some cases, user interaction may be required and then the MS
cannot activate the PDP and MBMS context(s) automatically.

\# 11 (PLMN not allowed);

\- The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2)
and enter the state GMM-DEREGISTERED. The MS shall delete the list of
equivalent PLMNs.

\- The MS shall store the PLMN identity in the \"forbidden PLMN list\"
and if the MS is configured to use timer T3245 (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) then the MS shall
start timer T3245 and proceed as described in subclause 4.1.1.6. If the
message has been successfully integrity checked by the lower layers and
the MS maintains a PLMN-specific attempt counter for that PLMN, then the
MS shall set this counter to the MS implementation-specific maximum
value.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

\- If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A shall set the update
status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall delete any TMSI, LAI and
ciphering key sequence number. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to
3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 12 (Location area not allowed);

\- The MS shall delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS
ciphering key sequence number, shall set the GPRS update status to GU3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED (and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2)
and shall change to state GMM-DEREGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

\- The mobile station shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden
location areas for regional provision of service\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

\- If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED, shall delete any TMSI, LAI and ciphering key
sequence number and shall reset the location update attempt counter. The
new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a cell selection according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

NOTE 4: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state, EPS update status, GUTI, last visited registered
TAI, TAI list and KSI as specified in 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the
case when the service request procedure is rejected with the EMM cause
with the same value.

\# 13 (Roaming not allowed in this location area);

\- The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall change to
state GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

\- The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas
for roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

\- If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location update attempt counter.
The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall perform a PLMN selection according to 3GPP
TS 23.122 \[14\].

An MS in GAN mode shall request a PLMN list in GAN (see
3GPP TS 44.318 \[76b\]) prior to perform a PLMN selection from this list
according to 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\].

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the service request procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 15 (No Suitable Cells In Location Area);

\- The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall change to
state GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

\- The MS shall store the LAI in the list of \"forbidden location areas
for roaming\".

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

\- If no RR connection exists, the MS shall perform the following
additional actions immediately. If the MS is operating in MS operation
mode A and an RR connection exists, the MS shall perform these actions
when the RR connection is subsequently released:

\- If the MS is IMSI attached, the MS shall set the update status to U3
ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location update attempt counter.
The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall search for a suitable cell in another location area or a
tracking area according to 3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP
TS 25.304 \[98\] or 3GPP TS 36.304 \[121\].

NOTE 5: The cell selection procedure is not applicable for an MS in GAN
mode.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the service request procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\#22 (Congestion);

If the T3346 value IE is present in the SERVICE REJECT message and the
value indicates that this timer is neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall proceed as described below, otherwise it shall be considered as an
abnormal case and the behaviour of the MS for this case is specified in
subclause 4.7.13.5.

If the rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services, the MS shall abort the service request
procedure and enter state GMM-REGISTERED, and stop timer T3317 if still
running.

The MS shall stop timer T3346 if it is running.

If the SERVICE REJECT message is integrity protected, the MS shall start
timer T3346 with the value provided in the T3346 value IE.

If the SERVICE REJECT message is not integrity protected, the MS shall
start timer T3346 with a random value from the default range specified
in table 11.3a.

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies normal cell
reselection process. The service request procedure may be started by CM
layer, if it is still necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

A GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A or B which is already IMSI
attached for CS services in the network is still IMSI attached for CS
services in the network.

If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the service request procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 25 (Not authorized for this CSG)

\- Cause \#25 is only applicable in UTRAN Iu mode and when received from
a CSG cell. Other cases are considered as abnormal cases and the
specification of the mobile station behaviour is given in
subclause 4.7.13.5.

\- The MS shall set the GPRS update status to GU3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED
(and shall store it according to subclause 4.1.3.2) and shall change to
state GMM-REGISTERED.LIMITED-SERVICE.

\- If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS
has sent the SERVICE REQUEST message are contained in the Allowed CSG
list stored in the MS, the MS shall remove the entry corresponding to
this CSG ID and associated PLMN identity from the Allowed CSG list.

\- If the CSG ID and associated PLMN identity of the cell where the MS
has sent the SERVICE REQUEST message are contained in the Operator CSG
list, the MS shall proceed as specified in 3GPP TS 23.122 \[14\]
subclause 3.1A.

The MS shall start timer T3340 as described in subclause 4.7.1.9.

If the MS is IMSI attached for non-GPRS services, the MS shall set the
update status to U3 ROAMING NOT ALLOWED and shall reset the location
update attempt counter. The new MM state is MM IDLE.

\- The MS shall search for a suitable cell according to
3GPP TS 43.022 \[82\] and 3GPP TS 25.304 \[98\].

\- If S1 mode is supported in the MS, the MS shall handle the EMM
parameters EMM state and EPS update status as specified in
3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\] for the case when the service request procedure
is rejected with the EMM cause with the same value.

\# 40 (No PDP context activated)

\- The MS shall deactivate locally all active PDP and MBMS contexts and
the MS shall enter the state GMM-REGISTERED.NORMAL-SERVICE. If the
rejected request was not for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services, the MS may also activate PDP context(s) that were
originally activated by the MS to replace any previously MS activated
PDP context(s). The MS may also perform the procedures needed in order
to activate any previously active multicast service(s).

NOTE 6: In some cases, user interaction may be required and then the MS
cannot activate the PDP and MBMS context(s) automatically.

Other values are considered as abnormal cases. The specification of the
MS behaviour in those cases is described in subclause 4.7.13.5.

#### 4.7.13.4a Service request procedure for initiating a PDN connection for emergency bearer services not accepted by the network (UTRAN Iu mode only)

If the service request for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services cannot be accepted by the network, the MS shall perform
the procedures as described in subclause 4.7.13.4. Then if the MS is in
the same selected PLMN where the last service request was attempted, the
MS shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 1: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

b\) detach locally, if not detached already, attempt GPRS attach for
emergency bearer services.

If the service request for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services fails due to abnormal case a) in subclause 4.7.13.5, the
MS shall perform the procedures as described in subclause 4.7.13.5 and
inform the upper layers of the failure to access the network.

NOTE 2: This can result in the upper layers establishment of a CS
emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

If the service request for initiating a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services fails due to abnormal cases b), c) or d) in
subclause 4.7.13.5, the MS shall perform the procedures as described in
subclause 4.7.13.5. Then if the MS is in the same selected PLMN where
the last service request was attempted, the MS shall:

a\) inform the upper layers of the failure of the procedure; or

NOTE 3: This can result in the upper layers establishment of a CS
emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or other
implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures specified in
3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] that can result in the emergency call being
attempted to another IP-CAN.

b\) detach locally, if not detached already, attempt GPRS attach for
emergency bearer services.

#### 4.7.13.5 Abnormal cases in the MS

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Access barred because of access class control, EAB or ACDC

If the service request procedure is started in response to a paging
request from the network, access class barring, EAB or ACDC is not
applicable.

The service request procedure shall not be started. The MS stays in the
current serving cell and applies normal cell reselection process. The
service request procedure may be started by CM layer if it is still
necessary, i.e. when access is granted or because of a cell change.

If access is barred because of access class control, the service request
is initiated due to a request from upper layers for PS signalling
connection, ACDC is applicable to the request and the MS supports ACDC,
then the service request procedure shall be started.

If access is barred for a certain ACDC category, and if the service
request is initiated due to a request from upper layers for PS
signalling connection for a higher ACDC category and the MS supports
ACDC, then the service request procedure shall be started.

If an access request for an uncategorized application is barred due to
ACDC , and if the service request is initiated due to a request from
upper layers for PS signalling connection for a certain ACDC category
and the MS supports ACDC, then the service request procedure shall be
started.

b\) Lower layer failure without \"Extended Wait Time\" received from
lower layers before the security mode control procedure is completed,
SERVICE ACCEPT or SERVICE REJECT message is received

The procedure shall be aborted except in the following implementation
option cases b.1, b.2 and b.3.

b.1) Release of PS signalling connection in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection
release) before the completion of the service request procedure

The service request procedure shall be initiated again, if the following
conditions apply:

i\) The original service request procedure was initiated over an existing
PS signalling connection; and

ii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection were received after
the SERVICE REQUEST message was transmitted.

b.2) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with cause
different than \"Directed signalling connection re-establishment\", for
example, \"Normal\", or \"User inactivity\" (see 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]
and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The service request procedure shall be initiated again, if the following
conditions apply:

i\) The original service request procedure was initiated over an existing
RRC connection and,

ii\) No SECURITY MODE COMMAND message and no Non-Access Stratum (NAS)
messages relating to the PS signalling connection were received after
the SERVICE REQUEST messge was transmitted.

NOTE: The RRC connection release cause different than \"Directed
signalling connection re-establishment\" that triggers the re-initiation
of the service request procedure is implementation specific.

b.3) RR release in Iu mode (i.e. RRC connection release) with cause
\"Directed signalling connection re-establishment\" (see
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\])

The routing area updating procedure shall be initiated followed by a
rerun of the service request procedure if the following condition
applies:

i\) The service request procedure was not due to a rerun of the procedure
due to \"Directed signalling connection re-establishment\".

c\) T3317 expired

The MS shall enter GMM-REGISTERED state.

If the MS is in PMM-IDLE mode then the MS shall increment the service
request attempt counter, abort the procedure and release locally any
resources allocated for the service request procedure. If the service
request procedure is initiated to establish a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services or the MS has a PDN connection for emergency
bearer services established or the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 --
15 in selected PLMN, the service request counter shall not be
incremented. If the service request attempt counter is greater than or
equal to 5, the MS shall start timer T3325. The MS shall not attempt
service request until expiry of timer T3325 unless:

\- the service request is in response to paging from the network;

\- the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN;

\- the service request is initiated to establish a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services;

\- the MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services
established; or

\- the MS is registered in a new PLMN.

If the MS is in PMM-CONNECTED mode, then the procedure shall be aborted.

d\) SERVICE REJECT received, other causes than those treated in
subclause 4.7.13.4, and cases of GMM cause values \#22 and \#25, if
considered as abnormal cases according to subclause 4.7.13.4

The procedure shall be aborted.

e\) Routing area update procedure is triggered

If a cell change into a new routing area occurs and the necessity of
routing area update procedure is determined before the security mode
control procedure is completed, a SERVICE ACCEPT or SERVICE REJECT
message has been received, the Service request procedure shall be
aborted and the routing area updating procedure is started immediately.
Follow-on request pending may be indicated in the ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST for the service, which was the trigger of the aborted Service
request procedure, to restart the pending service itself or the Service
request procedure after the completion of the routing area updating
procedure. If the Service type of the aborted SERVICE REQUEST was
indicating \"data\", then the routing area update procedure may be
followed by a re-initiated Service request procedure indicating
\"data\", if it is still necessary. If the Service type was indicating
\"MBMS multicast service reception\", or \"MBMS broadcast service
reception\" the Service request procedure shall be aborted.

f\) Power off

If the MS is in state GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED at power off, the
GPRS detach procedure shall be performed.

g\) Detach procedure collision

GPRS detach containing detach type \"re-attach required\" or \"re-attach
not required\":

If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message from the network in state
GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED, the GPRS detach procedure shall be
progressed and the Service request procedure shall be aborted. If the
GMM cause IE, in the DETACH REQUEST message, indicated a \"re-attach
required\", the GPRS attach procedure shall be performed. If the DETACH
REQUEST message contains detach type \"re-attach not required\" and GMM
cause \#2 \"IMSI unknown in HLR\", the MS will follow the procedure as
described below for the detach type \"IMSI detach\".

GPRS detach containing detach type \"IMSI detach\":

If the MS receives a DETACH REQUEST message from the network in state
GMM-SERVICE-REQUEST-INITIATED, the network and the MS shall progress
both procedures.

h\) \"Extended wait time\" for PS domain from the lower layers

The MS shall abort the service request procedure, enter state
GMM-REGISTERED, and stop timer T3317 if still running.

If the SERVICE REQUEST message contained the low priority indicator set
to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\", the MS shall
start timer T3346 with the \"Extended wait time\" value.

In other cases the MS shall ignore the \"Extended wait time\".

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies normal cell
reselection process. The service request procedure is started, if still
necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

m\) Timer T3346 is running

The MS shall not start the service request procedure unless:

\- the MS receives a paging; or

\- the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN; or

\- the MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services
established; or

\- the MS is establishing a PDN connection for emergency bearer
services; or

\- the MS has a PDN connection established without the NAS signalling
low priority indication or is establishing a PDN connection without the
NAS signalling low priority indication, the timer T3302 and the timer
T3311 are not running and the timer T3346 was started due to rejection
of a NAS request message (e.g. ATTACH REQUEST, ROUTING AREA UPDATE
REQUEST or SERVICE REQUEST) which contained the low priority indicator
set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\".

The MS stays in the current serving cell and applies normal cell
reselection process. The service request procedure is started, if still
necessary, when timer T3346 expires or is stopped.

#### 4.7.13.6 Abnormal cases on the network side

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Lower layer failure

If a low layer failure occurs before the security mode control procedure
is completed, a SERVICE ACCEPT or SERVICE REJECT message has been sent
to the MS, the network enters/stays in PMM-IDLE.

b\) Protocol error

If the SERVICE REQUEST message is received with a protocol error, the
network shall return a SERVICE REJECT message with one of the following
reject causes:

\#96: Mandatory information element error;

\#99: Information element non-existent or not implemented;

\#100: Conditional IE error;

\#111: Protocol error, unspecified.

The network stays in PMM-IDLE mode.

c\) More than one SERVICE REQUEST received and the procedure has not been
completed (i.e., the security mode control procedure has not been
completed or SERVICE ACCEPT, SERVICE REJECT message has not been sent)

\- If one or more of the information elements in the SERVICE REQUEST
message differs from the ones received within the previous SERVICE
REQUEST message, the previously initiated Service request procedure
shall be aborted and the new Service request procedure shall be
progressed;

\- If the information elements do not differ, then the network shall
continue with the previous Service request procedure and shall not treat
any further this SERVICE REQUEST message.

d\) ATTACH REQUEST received before the security mode control procedure
has been completed or an SERVICE ACCEPT or an SERVICE REJECT message has
been sent

If an ATTACH REQUEST message is received and the security mode control
procedure has not been completed or an SERVICE ACCEPT or an SERVICE
REJECT message has not been sent, the network may initiate the GMM
common procedures, e.g. the GMM authentication and ciphering procedure.
The network may e.g. after a succesful GMM authentication and ciphering
procedure execution, abort the Service request procedure, the GMM
context, PDP contexts and MBMS contexts, if any, are deleted and the new
ATTACH REQUEST is progressed.

e\) ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message received before the security mode
control procedure has been completed or an SERVICE ACCEPT or an SERVICE
REJECT message has been sent

If an ROUTING AREA UPDATE REQUEST message is received and the security
mode control procedure has not been completed or an SERVICE ACCEPT or an
SERVICE REJECT message has not been sent, the network may initiate the
GMM common procedures, e.g. the GMM authentication and ciphering
procedure. The network may e.g. after a successful GMM authentication
and ciphering procedure execution, abort the Service request procedure
and progress the routing area update procedure.

f\) If the Service Type indicates 'data' and the network fails to
re-establish some or all RAB(s) then the SGSN may determine if PDP
Context Modification or PDP Context Deactivation should be initiated.\
The appropriate action is an operator choice and depends on the QoS
profile of the PDP Context, and the Uplink data status.

### 4.7.14 Void

### 4.7.15 GMM eCall inactivity procedure

The GMM eCall inactivity procedure is applicable only to an eCall only
mobile station (as determined by information configured in USIM) that is
capable of eCall over IMS and attached for GPRS services. The procedure
shall be started when:

\- the mobile station is in PMM-IDLE mode (Iu mode) or packet idle mode;

\- the mobile station is in MM IDLE state;

\- the mobile station is in any GMM-REGISTERED substate except
GMM-REGISTERED.NO-CELL-AVAILABLE or GMM-REGISTERED.PLMN-SEARCH; and

\- one of the following conditions applies:

\- timer T3242 expires or is found to have already expired and timer
T3243 is not running;

\- timer T3243 expires or is found to have already expired and timer
T3242 is not running; or

\- timers T3242 and T3243 expire or have found to have already expired.

The mobile station shall then stop other running timers (e.g. T3311,
T3312) and shall:

\- if the mobile station is also attached for non-GPRS services and the
network operates in network operation mode I, perform a combined GPRS
detach procedure for GPRS and non-GPRS services;

\- if the mobile station is also attached for non-GPRS services and the
network operates in network operation mode II, perform a GPRS detach
procedure for GPRS services and an IMSI detach procedure; and

\- if the mobile station is not attached for non-GPRS services, perform
a GPRS detach procedure for GPRS services.

The mobile station shall then enter MM Idle eCALL INACTIVE state, delete
any LAI, TMSI, ciphering key sequence number stored in the SIM/USIM,
delete any RAI, P-TMSI, P-TMSI signature and GPRS ciphering key sequence
number stored, delete any GUTI, TAI list, last visited registered TAI,
list of equivalent PLMNs, KSI and set the update state to U4 Updating
Disabled.

While in eCALL INACTIVE state, the mobile station shall behave as
specified in subclause 4.4.7.
