
O.5 Handling of unknown, unforeseen, and erroneous protocol data
================================================================

O.5.1 General
-------------

The following subclauses specifies procedures for the handling of
unknown, unforeseen, and erroneous protocol data by the receiving MS.
These procedures are called \"error handling procedures\", but in
addition to providing recovery mechanisms for error situations they
define a compatibility mechanism for future extensions of the protocols.

Subclauses O.5.2 to O.5.5 shall be applied in order of precedence.

For the definition of semantical and syntactical errors see 3GPP TS
24.007 \[20\], subclause 11.4.2.

Where the description of information elements in the present document
contains bits defined to be \"spare bits\", these bits shall set to the
indicated value (usually 0) by the sending side, and their value shall
be ignored by the receiving side.

O.5.2 Not supported IEs, unknown IEIs
-------------------------------------

The MS shall ignore all information elements which are not supported and
all information elements with unknown IEI.

O.5.3 Repeated IEs
------------------

If an information element, for which repetition is not specified in
subclause O.2, is repeated in the user-user protocol contents, only the
contents of the information element appearing first shall be handled and
all subsequent repetitions of the information element shall be ignored.
When repetition of information elements is specified, only the contents
of specified repeated information elements shall be handled. If the
limit on repetition of information elements is exceeded, the contents of
information elements appearing first up to the limit of repetitions
shall be handled and all subsequent repetitions of the information
element shall be ignored.

O.5.4 Syntactically incorrect IEs
---------------------------------

The MS shall treat all IEs that are syntactically incorrect as not
present in the user-user protocol contents.

O.5.5 Semantically incorrect IEs
--------------------------------

When an IE with semantically incorrect contents is received, the
foreseen reactions specified for the respective procedure are performed
(e.g. in the context of CSI see 3GPP TS 24.279 \[116\], clauses 5, 6).
If however no such reactions are specified, the MS shall ignore the IE.

########  Annex P (normative): Mobility management for IMS voice termination
