
H.3 Service or option not available class
=========================================

H.3.1 Cause No. 49 \"quality of service unavailable\"
-----------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates to the mobile station that the requested quality of
service, as defined in ITU-T Recommendation X.213 \[144\], cannot be
provided.

H.3.2 Cause No. 50 \"Requested facility not subscribed\"
--------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the requested supplementary service could not
be provided by the network because the user has no completed the
necessary administrative arrangements with its supporting networks.

H.3.3 Cause No. 55 \"Incoming calls barred within the CUG\"
-----------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that although the called party is a member of the
CUG for the incoming CUG call, incoming calls are not allowed within
this CUG.

H.3.4 Cause No. 57 \"bearer capability not authorized\"
-------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the mobile station has requested a bearer
capability which is implemented by the equipment which generated this
cause but the mobile station is not authorized to use.

H.3.5 Cause No. 58 \"bearer capability not presently available\"
----------------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the mobile station has requested a bearer
capability which is implemented by the equipment which generated this
cause but which is not available at this time.

H.3.6 Cause No. 63 \"service or option not available, unspecified\"
-------------------------------------------------------------------

This cause is used to report a service or option not available event
only when no other cause in the service or option not available class
applies.

H.3.7 Cause No. 68 \"ACM equal to or greater than ACMmax\"
----------------------------------------------------------

This cause is used by the mobile to indicate that call clearing is due
to ACM being greater than or equal to ACMmax.
