
H.6 Protocol error (e.g., unknown message) class
================================================

H.6.1 Cause No. 96 \"invalid mandatory information\"
----------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the equipment sending this cause has received
a message with a non-semantical mandatory IE error (see subclause 8.5).

H.6.2 Cause No. 97 \"message type non-existent or not implemented\"
-------------------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the equipment sending this cause has received
a message with a message type it does not recognize either because this
is a message not defined, or defined but not implemented by the
equipment sending this cause.

H.6.3 Cause No. 98 \"message type not compatible with protocol state\"
----------------------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the equipment sending this cause has received
a message not compatible with the protocol state (subclause 8.4).

H.6.4 Cause No. 99 \"information element non-existent or not implemented\"
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the equipment sending this cause has received
a message which includes information elements not recognized because the
information element identifier is not defined or it is defined but not
implemented by the equipment sending the cause. However, the information
element is not required to be present in the message in order for the
equipment sending the cause to process the message.

H.6.5 Cause No. 100 \"conditional IE error\"
--------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the equipment sending this cause has received
a message with conditional IE errors (see subclause 8.7.2).

H.6.6 Cause No. 101 \"message not compatible with protocol state\"
------------------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that a message has been received which is
incompatible with the protocol state or that a STATUS message has been
received indicating an incompatible call state.

H.6.7 Cause No. 102 \"recovery on timer expiry\"
------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that a procedure has been initiated by the expiry
of a timer in association with 3GPP TS 24.008 error handling procedures.

H.6.8 Cause No. 111 \"protocol error, unspecified\"
---------------------------------------------------

This cause is used to report a protocol error event only when no other
cause in the protocol error class applies.
