
B.3 Called side compatibility checking
======================================

In this clause, the word \"check\" means that the MS examines the
contents of the specified information element.

B.3.1 Compatibility checking with addressing information
--------------------------------------------------------

If an incoming SETUP message is offered to the MS with addressing
information (i.e. sub-address or called party number) the following
shall occur:

a\) if the MS has a DDI number or a sub-address, then the information in
any Called Party BCD Number or any Called Party subaddress information
elements of the incoming SETUP message shall be checked by the MS
against the corresponding part of the number assigned to the user (e.g.
for DDI) or the user\'s own sub-address.

In the cases of a mismatch, the MS shall release the call. In the case
of a match, the compatibility checking described in B.3.2 and B.3.3
shall be performed.

b\) if the MS has no DDI number and no sub-address, then the Called Party
BCD Number and Called Party Sub-address information element shall be
ignored for the purposes of compatibility checking. The compatibility
checking described in B.3.2 and B.3.3 shall be performed.

NOTE: According to the user\'s requirements, compatibility checking can
be performed in various ways from the viewpoint of execution order and
information to be checked, e.g. first DDI number/sub-address and then
bearer capability or vice versa.

B.3.2 Network-to-MS compatibility checking
------------------------------------------

When the network is providing a basic service at the called side, the MS
shall check that the basic service(s) offered by the network in the
Bearer Capability information element(s) match(es) the basic services
that the MS is able to support. If a mismatch is detected, then the MS
shall proceed as follows:

\- if the SETUP message contained two bearer capability information
elements for only one of which a mismatch is detected, the MS shall
either:

\- under the conditions specified in 3GPP TS 27.001 \[36\] (e.g. TS 61
and TS 62), accept the SETUP message with a CALL CONFIRMED message
containing the, possibly negotiated, bearer capability information
element for which no mismatch is detected, or

\- reject the call using cause No. 88 \"incompatible destination\".

\- otherwise the MS shall reject the offered call using a RELEASE
COMPLETE message with cause No. 88 \"incompatible destination\".

NOTE: The *backup bearer capability* IE is not subject to compatibility
checking.

When interworking with existing networks, limitations in network or
distant user signalling (e.g. in the case of an incoming call from a
PSTN or a call from an analogue terminal) may restrict the information
available to the called MS in the incoming SETUP message (e.g. missing
Bearer Capability Information Element or missing High Layer
Compatibility Information Element). For compatibility checking, and
handling of such calls see 3GPP TS 27.001 \[36\].

B.3.3 User-to-User compatibility checking
-----------------------------------------

See 3GPP TS 27.001 \[36\].
