
G.2 Cause related to subscription options
=========================================

Cause value = 11 PLMN not allowed

This cause is sent to the MS if it requests service, or if the network
initiates a detach request, in a PLMN where the MS, by subscription or
due to operator determined barring is not allowed to operate.

Cause value = 12 Location Area not allowed

This cause is sent to the MS if it requests service, or if the network
initiates a detach request, in a location area where the HPLMN
determines that the MS, by subscription, is not allowed to operate.

NOTE 1: If cause \#12 is sent to a roaming subscriber the subscriber is
denied service even if other PLMNs are available on which registration
was possible.

Cause value = 13 Roaming not allowed in this location area

This cause is sent to an MS which requests service, or if the network
initiates a detach request, in a location area of a PLMN which by
subscription offers roaming to that MS but not in that location area.

> Cause value = 15 No Suitable Cells In Location Area
>
> This cause is sent to the MS if it requests service, or if the network
> initiates a detach request, in a location area where the MS, by
> subscription, is not allowed to operate, but when it should find
> another allowed location area or tracking area in the same PLMN or an
> equivalent PLMN.

NOTE 2: Cause \#15 and cause \#12 differ in the fact that cause \#12
does not trigger the MS to search for another allowed location area on
the same PLMN.

Cause value = 25 Not authorized for this CSG

This cause is sent to the MS if it requests access, or if the network
initiates a detach request, in a CSG cell where the MS either has no
subscription to operate or the MS\'s subscription has expired and it
should find another cell in the same PLMN or an equivalent PLMN.

NOTE 3: The MS not supporting CSG will not receive cause\# 25, as such a
MS is not supposed to try to access a CSG cell.
