
 1 Scope
========

The present document specifies the procedures used at the radio
interface core network protocols within the 3^rd^ generation mobile
telecommunications system and the digital cellular telecommunications
system.

It specifies the procedures used at the radio interface (Reference Point
Um or Uu, see 3GPP TS 24.002 \[15\] or 3GPP TS 23.002 \[127\]) for Call
Control (CC), Mobility Management (MM), and Session Management (SM).

When the notations for \"further study\" or \"FS\" or \"FFS\" are
present in this TS they mean that the indicated text is not a normative
portion of the present document.

These procedures are defined in terms of messages exchanged over the
control channels of the radio interface. The control channels are
described in 3GPP TS 44.003 \[16\] and 3GPP TS 25.301 \[128\].

The structured functions and procedures of this protocol and the
relationship with other layers and entities are described in general
terms in 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\].

The present document specifies functions, procedures and information
which apply to GERAN Iu mode. However, functionality related to GERAN Iu
mode is neither maintained nor enhanced.

1.1 Scope of the Technical Specification
----------------------------------------

The procedures currently described in this TS are for the call control
of circuit-switched connections, session management for GPRS services,
mobility management and radio resource management for circuit-switched
and GPRS services.

3GPP TS 24.010 \[21\] contains functional procedures for support of
supplementary services.

3GPP TS 24.011 \[22\] contains functional procedures for support of
point-to-point short message services.

3GPP TS 24.012 \[23\] contains functional description of short message -
cell broadcast.

3GPP TS 44.060 \[76\] contains procedures for radio link control and
medium access control (RLC/MAC) of packet data physical channels.

3GPP TS 44.071 \[23a\] contains functional descriptions and procedures
for support of location services.

NOTE: \"layer 3\" includes the functions and protocols described in the
present document. The terms \"data link layer\" and \"layer 2\" are used
interchangeably to refer to the layer immediately below layer 3.

1.2 Application to the interface structures
-------------------------------------------

The procedures defined in the present document apply to the interface
structures defined in 3GPP TS 44.003 \[16\] and 3GPP TS 25.301 \[128\].
They use the functions and services provided by lower layers defined in
3GPP TS 44.005 \[18\] and 3GPP TS 44.006 \[19\] or 3GPP
TS 25.331 \[23c\], 3GPP TS 25.322 \[19b\] and 3GPP TS 25.321 \[19a\].
3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\] gives the general description of layer 3 (A/Gb
mode) and Non Access Stratum (Iu mode and S1 mode) including procedures,
messages format and error handling.

1.3 Structure of layer 3 procedures
-----------------------------------

A building block method is used to describe the layer 3 procedures.

The basic building blocks are \"elementary procedures\" provided by the
protocol control entities of the three sublayers, i.e. radio resource
management, mobility management and connection management sublayer.

Complete layer 3 transactions consist of specific sequences of
elementary procedures. The term \"structured procedure\" is used for
these sequences.

1.4 Test procedures
-------------------

Test procedures of the GSM radio interface signalling are described in
3GPP TS 51.010 \[39\] and 3GPP TS 51.02x series.

1.5 Use of logical channels in A/Gb mode
----------------------------------------

The logical control channels are defined in 3GPP TS 45.002 \[32\]. In
the following those control channels are considered which carry
signalling information or specific types of user packet information:

i\) Broadcast Control CHannel (BCCH): downlink only, used to broadcast
Cell specific information;

ii\) Synchronization CHannel (SCH): downlink only, used to broadcast
synchronization and BSS identification information;

iii\) Paging CHannel (PCH): downlink only, used to send page requests to
Mobile Stations (MSs);

iv\) Random Access CHannel (RACH): uplink only, used to request a
Dedicated Control CHannel;

v\) Access Grant CHannel (AGCH): downlink only, used to allocate a
Dedicated Control CHannel;

vi\) Standalone Dedicated Control CHannel (SDCCH): bi-directional;

vii\) Fast Associated Control CHannel (FACCH): bi-directional, associated
with a Traffic CHannel;

viii\) Slow Associated Control CHannel (SACCH): bi-directional,
associated with a SDCCH or a Traffic CHannel;

ix\) Cell Broadcast CHannel (CBCH): downlink only used for general (not
point to point) short message information;

x\) Notification CHannel (NCH): downlink only, used to notify mobile
stations of VBS (Voice Broadcast Service) calls or VGCS (Voice Group
Call Service) calls.

Two service access points are defined on signalling layer 2 which are
discriminated by their Service Access Point Identifiers (SAPI) (see
3GPP TS 44.006 \[19\]):

i\) SAPI 0: supports the transfer of signalling information including
user-user information;

ii\) SAPI 3: supports the transfer of user short messages.

Layer 3 selects the service access point, the logical control channel
and the mode of operation of layer 2 (acknowledged, unacknowledged or
random access, see 3GPP TS 44.005 \[18\] and 3GPP TS 44.006 \[19\]) as
required for each individual message.

1.6 Overview of control procedures
----------------------------------

### 1.6.1 List of procedures

The following procedures are specified in the present document:

a\) Clause 4 specifies elementary procedures for Mobility Management:

\- mobility management common procedures (subclause 4.3):

\- TMSI reallocation procedure (subclause 4.3.1);

\- authentication procedure (subclause 4.3.2);

\- identification procedure (subclause 4.3.3);

\- IMSI detach procedure (subclause 4.3.4);

\- abort procedure (subclause 4.3.5);

\- MM information procedure (subclause 4.3.6).

\- mobility management specific procedures (subclause 4.4):

\- location updating procedure (subclause 4.4.1);

\- periodic updating (subclause 4.4.2);

\- IMSI attach procedure (subclause 4.4.3);

\- generic location updating procedure (subclause 4.4).

\- connection management sublayer service provision:

\- mobility management connection establishment (subclause 4.5.1);

\- mobility management connection information transfer phase
(subclause 4.5.2);

\- mobility management connection release (subclause 4.5.3).

\- GPRS specific mobility management procedures (subclause 4.7):

\- GPRS attach procedure (subclause 4.7.3);

\- GPRS detach procedure (subclause 4.7.4);

\- GPRS routing area updating procedure (subclause 4.7.5).

\- GPRS common mobility management procedures (subclause 4.7):

\- GPRS P-TMSI reallocation procedure (subclause 4.7.6);

\- GPRS authentication and ciphering procedure (subclause 4.7.7);

\- GPRS identification procedure (subclause 4.7.8);

\- GPRS information procedure (subclause 4.7.12).

b\) Clause 5 specifies elementary procedures for circuit switched Call
Control comprising the following elementary procedures:

\- mobile originating call establishment (subclause 5.2.1);

\- mobile terminating call establishment (subclause 5.2.2);

\- signalling procedures during the active state (subclause 5.3):

\- user notification procedure (subclause 5.3.1);

\- call rearrangements (subclause 5.3.2);

\- DTMF protocol control procedure (subclause 5.5.7);

\- in-call modification (subclause 5.3.4).

\- call clearing initiated by the mobile station (subclause 5.4.3);

\- call clearing initiated by the network (subclause 5.4.4);

\- miscellaneous procedures:

\- in-band tones and announcements (subclause 5.5.1);

\- status enquiry procedure (subclause 5.5.3);

\- call re-establishment procedure (subclause 5.5.4).

d\) Clause 6 specifies elementary procedures for session management:

\- GPRS session management procedures (subclause 6.1):

\- PDP context activation (subclauses 6.1.3.1 and 6.1.3.2);

\- PDP context modification (subclause 6.1.3.3);

\- PDP context deactivation (subclause 6.1.3.4).

\- MBMS context activation (subclause 6.1.3.8);

\- MBMS context deactivation (subclause 6.1.3.9).

The elementary procedures can be combined to form structured procedures.
Examples of such structured procedures are given in clause 7. This part
of the present document is only provided for guidance to assist
implementations.

Clause 8 specifies actions to be taken on various error conditions and
also provides rules to ensure compatibility with future enhancements of
the protocol.

1.7 Applicability of implementations
------------------------------------

The applicability of procedures of the present document for the mobile
station is dependent on the services and functions which are to be
supported by a mobile station.

### 1.7.1 Voice Group Call Service (VGCS) and Voice Broadcast Service (VBS)

Voice Group Call Service and Voice Broadcast Service are applicable in
A/Gb mode only.

For mobile stations supporting the Voice Group Call Service or the Voice
Broadcast Service, it is explicitly mentioned throughout the present
document if a certain procedure is applicable only for such a service
and, if necessary, how mobile stations not supporting such a service
shall behave.

For VGCS and VBS, the following possible mobile station implementations
exist:

\- support of listening to voice broadcast calls (VBS listening);

\- support of originating a voice broadcast call (VBS originating);

\- support of listening to voice group calls (VGCS listening);

\- support of talking in voice group calls (VGCS talking. This always
includes the implementation for VGCS listening);

\- support of originating a voice group call (VGCS originating. This
always includes the implementation for VGCS talking).

Apart from the explicitly mentioned combinations, all possible
combinations are optional and supported by the present document.

The related terms are used in the present document, if information on
these implementation options is required.

### 1.7.2 General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)

#### 1.7.2.1 Packet services in GSM (A/Gb mode only)

For mobile stations supporting the General Packet Radio Service (GPRS),
it is explicitly mentioned throughout the technical specification if a
certain procedure is applicable only for such a service and, if
necessary, how mobile stations not supporting such a service shall
behave.

A GPRS MS may operate in one of the following MS operation modes, see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]:

\- MS operation mode A;

\- MS operation mode B; or

\- MS operation mode C.

The MS operation mode depends on the services that the MS is attached
to, i.e., only GPRS or both GPRS and non-GPRS services, and upon the
MS\'s capabilities to operate GPRS and other GSM services
simultaneously. Mobile stations that are capable to operate GPRS
services are referred to as GPRS MSs.

NOTE: Other GSM technical specifications may refer to the MS operation
modes A, B, and C as GPRS class‑A MS, GPRS class‑B MS, and GPRS class‑C
MS.

It should be noted that it is possible that for a GPRS MS, the GMM
procedures currently described in the ETS do not support combinations of
VGCS, VBS and GPRS. The possible interactions are not studied yet.

#### 1.7.2.2 Packet services in Iu mode (Iu mode only)

An MS attached to packet switched domain may operate in one of the
following MS operation modes, see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]:

\- CS/PS mode of operation; or

\- PS mode of operation.

The terms \'CS/PS mode of operation\' and \'PS mode of operation\' are
not used in the present document with some exceptions. Instead the terms
\'MS operation mode A\' and \'MS operation mode C\' are used.

In network operation mode I and II (see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]), an MS in
CS/PS mode of operation shall use the same\
procedures as for a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode A, unless it
is explicitly stated for A/Gb mode only or\
Iu mode only.

In network operation mode I and II, an MS in PS mode of operation shall
use the same procedures as for a GPRS MS operating in MS operation mode
C, unless it is explicitly stated for A/Gb mode only or Iu mode only.

1.8 Handling of NAS signalling low priority indication
------------------------------------------------------

An MS configured for NAS signalling low priority (see
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\], 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) indicates this by
including the Device properties IE in the appropriate NAS message and
setting the low priority indicator to \"MS is configured to NAS
signalling low priority\" except for the following cases in which the MS
shall set the low priority indicator to \"MS is not configured for NAS
signalling low priority\":

\- the MS is performing an attach for emergency bearer services;

\- the MS has a PDN connection for emergency bearer services established
and is performing mobility management procedures, or is establishing a
PDN connection for emergency bearer services;

\- the MS configured for dual priority is requested by the upper layers
to establish a PDN connection with the low priority indicator set to
\"MS is not configured for NAS signalling low priority\";

\- the MS configured for dual priority is performing session management
procedures related to the PDN connection established with low priority
indicator set to \"MS is not configured for NAS signalling low
priority\";

\- the MS configured for dual priority has a PDN connection established
by setting the low priority indicator to \"MS is not configured for NAS
signalling low priority\" and is performing mobility management
procedures;

\- the MS is establishing or re-establishing an MM connection for an
emergency call;

\- the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN; or

\- the MS is responding to paging.

The network may use the NAS signalling low priority indication for NAS
level mobility management congestion control on a per core network node
basis and APN based congestion control.

If the NAS signalling low priority indication is provided in an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the SGSN stores the NAS signalling low
priority indication within the default PDP context activated due to this
request.

1.9 Restrictions
----------------

Independently of what is stated elsewhere in this and other 3GPP
specifications, mobile station support for PBCCH and PCCCH is optional
for A/Gb-mode of operation. The network shall never enable PBCCH and
PCCCH. This makes use of network operation mode III obsolete.
