
L.1 Mapping of NAS procedure to RRC establishment cause(Iu mode only)
=====================================================================

When MM requests the establishment of an RR connection, the RRC
establishment cause used by the MS shall be selected according to the CS
NAS procedure as specified in table L.1.1.

Table L.1.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Mapping of CS NAS procedure to establishment
cause

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **CS NAS procedure**                                                                                                                                                                       **RRC Establishment cause (according 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]**)
  Originating CS speech call                                                                                                                                                                 Originating Conversational Call
  Originating CS data call                                                                                                                                                                   Originating Conversational Call
  CS Emergency call                                                                                                                                                                          Emergency call
  Call re-establishment                                                                                                                                                                      Call re-establishment
  Location update                                                                                                                                                                            Registration
  IMSI Detach                                                                                                                                                                                Detach
  MO SMS via CS domain                                                                                                                                                                       Originating Low Priority Signalling
  Supplementary Services                                                                                                                                                                     Originating High Priority Signalling
  Answer to circuit switched paging                                                                                                                                                          Set equal to the value of the paging cause used in the reception of paging in the RRC layer
  Answer to paging for CS fallback                                                                                                                                                           Terminating Conversational Call
                                                                                                                                                                                             Terminating High Priority Signalling, if in the E-UTRAN, the RRC connection is released with cause CS Fallback High Priority.
  SS part of Location services                                                                                                                                                               Originating High Priority Signalling
  Any CS NAS procedure where the initiating uplink signalling message has the Device properties IE with low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\"   Delay tolerant
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When MM requests the establishment of an RR connection, if the MS is
configured for EAB (see the \"ExtendedAccessBarring\" leaf of the NAS
configuration MO in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]),
the MS is not an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN, the
MS is not answering to paging and the RRC Establishment cause is not set
to \"Emergency call\", then the MM shall indicate to the lower layer for
the purpose of access control that EAB applies for this request.

NOTE 1: void.

NOTE 2: EAB override is not supported in the CS domain.

When GMM requests the establishment of a PS signalling connection, the
RRC establishment cause used by the MS shall be selected according to
the PS NAS procedure as specified in Table L.1.2.

Table L.1.2/3GPP TS 24.008: Mapping of PS NAS procedure to establishment
cause

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **PS NAS procedure**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        **RRC Establishment cause (according 3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\]**)

  GPRS Attach                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 If the ATTACH REQUEST has Attach type not set to \"Emergency attach\", the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Registration except when the MS initiates attach procedure to establish emergency bearer services.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If the ATTACH REQUEST has Attach type set to \"Emergency attach\" or if the ATTACH REQUEST has Attach type not set to \"Emergency attach\" but the MS initiates the attach procedure on receiving request from upper layer to establish emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Emergency call. (See Note 2)

  Routing Area Update -- for the case of 'Directed Signalling Connection Re-Establishment (see chapter 4.7.2.5.)                                                                                                                                                                                              If the MS does not have a PDN connection established for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Call Re-Establishment.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If the MS has a PDN connection established for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Emergency call. (See Note 2)

  Routing area Update -- all cases other than 'Directed Signalling Connection Re-Establishment or answer to packet paging                                                                                                                                                                                     If the MS does not have a PDN connection established for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Registration.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If the MS has a PDN connection established for emergency bearer services, or is initiating a PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION that has request type set to \"emergency\", the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Emergency call. (See Note 2)

  GPRS Detach                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Detach

  Request to re-establish RABs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                If the request is not to re-establish RABs for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to either 'Originating Conversational Call' or 'Originating Streaming Call' or 'Originating Interactive Call' or 'Originating Background Call ' -- depending on the Traffic Class in QoS of the \"most demanding\" Traffic Class, considering all active PDP contexts. (see Note 1)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If the request is to re-establish RABs for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Emergency call. (See Note 2)

  Request to establish a PS signalling connection for MBMS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MBMS reception or MBMS p-t-p RB request

  Activate PDP Context                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        If the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST has the Request Type not set to \"emergency\", the RRC establishment cause shall be set to either 'Originating Conversational Call' or 'Originating Streaming Call' or 'Originating Interactive Call' or 'Originating Background Call ' -- depending on the Traffic Class in QoS of the \"most demanding\" Traffic Class, considering all active PDP contexts together with the PDP context to be activated. (see Note 1) --\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If Traffic Class in QoS is not 'Conversational Class' or 'Streaming Class' or 'Interactive Class' or 'Background Class' but is 'Subscribed Traffic Class', then 'Originating Subscribed traffic Call' shall be used.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST has the Request Type set to \"emergency\", the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Emergency call. (See Note 2)

  Modify PDP Context                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Originating High Priority Signalling

  Deactivate PDP Context                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Originating High Priority Signalling

  MO SMS via PS domain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Originating Low Priority Signalling

  SS part of Location services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Originating High Priority Signalling

  Answer to packet paging                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     If the MS does not have a PDN connection established for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set equal to the value of the paging cause used in the reception of paging in the RRC layer.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              If the MS has a PDN connection established for emergency bearer services, the RRC establishment cause shall be set to Emergency call. (See Note 2)

  Any PS NAS procedure where the initiating uplink signalling message has the Device propertiesIE with low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\"                                                                                                                     Delay tolerant

  NOTE 1: For classification of \"most demanding\" Traffic Class the following ranking order applies: \"Conversational\" followed by \"Streaming\" followed by \"Interactive\" followed by \"Background\", where \"Conversational\" is the most demanding Traffic class in terms of being delay sensitive.\   
  NOTE 2: The emergency bearer services are only supported in UTRAN Iu mode.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE 3: The RRC establishment cause can be used by the network to
prioritise the connection establishment request from the MS at high load
situations in the network.

When GMM requests the establishment of a PS signalling connection, if
the MS is configured for EAB (see the \"ExtendedAccessBarring\" leaf of
the NAS configuration MO as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]), the GMM shall indicate to the lower layer for
the purpose of access control that EAB applies for this request except
for the following cases:

\- the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN;

\- the MS is answering to paging;

\- the RRC Establishment cause is set to \"Emergency call\";

\- the MS is configured to allow overriding EAB (see the
\"Override\_ExtendedAccessBarring\" leaf of the NAS configuration MO as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) and
receives an indication from the upper layers to override EAB; or

\- the MS is configured to allow overriding EAB (see the
\"Override\_ExtendedAccessBarring\" leaf of the NAS configuration MO as
specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\]) and
already has a PDN connection that was established with EAB override.

NOTE 4: void.

########  Annex M (normative): Additional Requirements for backward compatibility with PCS 1900 for NA revision 0 ME

This annex provides additional requirements to support network
mechanisms for backward compatibility with PCS 1900 for NA revision 0
mobile equipments (applicable until July 1, 1998).

PCS 1900 for NA revision 0 mobile equipments are defined to understand
Mobile Network Codes made of up to 2 digits. However federal regulation
mandates that a 3-digit MNC shall be allocated by each administration to
network operators. Therefore each network operator is identified by a
3-digit Mobile Country Code and a 3-digit Mobile Network Code. An
operator whose network code complies to the allocation principle
specified for PCS 1900 for NA and wants to achieve for a transition
period of time the backward compatibility with PCS 1900 for NA revision
0 mobile equipments shall apply the following:

\- The network shall send over the air interface the 3-digit Mobile
Country Code and only the two most significant digits of the Mobile
Network Code (the value of the \"digit\" sent instead of the 3rd digit
^is^ specified in 3GPP TS 24.008, subclause 10.5.1.3) (see note).

When a PCS 1900 for NA (revision greater than 0) mobile equipment
recognizes over the air the Mobile Country Code and the two most
significant digits of the Mobile Network Code as being the HPLMN codes
of the current IMSI, the mobile equipment shall take into account the
value of the sixth IMSI digit read from the SIM/USIM. If this value
matches to a value contained in the limited set of values for the least
significant MNC digit assigned by the number administration bodies for
PCS 1900 for NA then the following applies for the mobile equipment:

\- The value sent over the air instead of the 3rd MNC di^gi^t in the
Location Area Identification (for coding see 3GPP TS 24.008,
subclause 10.5.1.3) shall be interpreted as the value of the sixth IMSI
digit read from the SIM/USIM.

NOTE: It is still a network operator option to apply this requirement
after July 1, 1998. However, in this case the following shall be
considered:

1\. Network selection considerations for overlapping networks:

\- Networks overlapping to the HPLMN, identified over the radio
interface by an identical combination MCC1 MCC2 MCC3 MNC1 MNC2 (possible
after July 1, 1998) may be selectable by PCS 1900 for NA mobile
equipments revision 0 with the same priority as the HPLMN or presented
to the user as the HPLMN.

2 Roaming considerations:

\- Roamers (SIM/USIM) from networks identified by an identical
combination MCC1 MCC2 MCC3 MNC1 MNC2 (possible after July 1, 1998) when
roaming into the operator network with PCS 1900 for NA mobile equipments
revision 0, may cause these equipments to exhibit an unpredictable
behaviour (e.g. looping in the HPLMN selection and registration
procedures).

\- Home subscribers (SIM/USIM) roaming with PCS 1900 for NA mobile
equipments revision 0 into networks identified by an identical
combination MCC1 MCC2 MCC3 MNC1 MNC2 (possible after July 1, 1998), may
consider being attached to the HPLMN.

######## Annex N (normative): Ranking of reject causes for Location Registration (MM and GMM) in a shared network 

This annex describes how the reject cause is determined:

\- for a network sharing non-supporting MS in a shared network with
multi-operator core network (MOCN) configuration; or

> \- for any MS in a multi-operator core network (MOCN) with common
> GERAN,

when a location registration request from the MS is redirected among CN
operators via the shared RAN (see 3GPP TS 23.251 \[109\]) and is
rejected by all core networks. In the following, the term \'location
registration\' is used for location area updating, GPRS attach, combined
GPRS attach, routing area updating, and combined routing area updating.

i\) If the location registration request was either:

1\) accepted;

2\) rejected with a reject cause different from \#11, \#12, \#13, \#14,
\#15, \#17, and \#25; or

3\) rejected with a reject cause \#17 when the MSC or the SGSN received
an error not indicating \"system failure\", \"data missing\" or
\"unexpected data value\" from the HLR (see 3GPP TS 29.002 \[37\] and
3GPP TS 29.010 \[152\]),

then one of the following actions is taken:

\- in UTRAN Iu mode, the MSC or SGSN shall include the redirection
completed information element in the RANAP DIRECT TRANSFER message
transmitting the location registration accept message or location
registration reject message to the RNC. According to
3GPP TS 25.413 \[19c\], the RNC will then forward the location
registration accept message or the location registration reject message
to the MS.

\- in A/Gb mode, the MSC shall use DTAP message and SGSN shall use BSSGP
DL-UNIDATA message to carry the location registration accept message or
location registration reject message to the BSC. According to
3GPP TS 48.008 \[85\] and 3GPP TS 48.018 \[86\], the BSC will then
forward the location registration accept message or location
registration reject message to the MS.

ii\) If the location registration request was either:

1\) rejected with one of the reject causes \#11, \#12, \#13, \#14, \#15,
and \#25; or

2\) rejected with a reject cause \#17 when the MSC or the SGSN received
an error indicating \"system failure\", \"data missing\" or \"unexpected
data value\" from the HLR (see 3GPP TS 29.002 \[37\] and
3GPP TS 29.010 \[152\]),

then one of the following actions is taken:

\- in UTRAN Iu mode, the MSC or SGSN shall include a redirection
indication in the RANAP DIRECT TRANSFER message transmitting the
location registration reject message to the RNC. According to 3GPP TS
25.413 \[19c\], the RNC will then initiate the redirection procedure
towards the next CN operator and treat the response from the core
network according to (i) and (ii).

-   in A/Gb mode, the MSC shall use BSSMAP Reroute Command message and
    SGSN shall use BSSGP DL-UNIDATA message to transmit the location
    registration reject message to the BSC with a redirection
    indication. According to 3GPP TS 48.008 \[85\] and
    3GPP TS 48.018 \[86\], the BSC will then initiate the redirection
    procedure towards the next CN operator and treat the response from
    the core network according to (i), (ii) and (iii).

iii\) If the location registration request was rejected including a
redirection indication and with one of the reject causes \#11, \#12,
\#13, \#14, \#15, \#17, and \#25 by all CN operators taking part in a
shared network, the RNC for UTRAN Iu mode or the BSC for A/Gb mode shall
determine the reject cause with the highest rank from the received
reject causes and send a location registration reject message containing
this reject cause to the MS.

The ranking of the reject causes, from the lowest rank to the highest
rank, is given by:

\#11 \< \#12 \< \#13 \< \#14 \< \#15 \< \#25 \< \#17.

iv\) If the location registration request was rejected with one of the
reject causes \#11, \#12, \#13, \#14, and \#15 by all CN operators
taking part in a shared network in a specific location area, but there
is at least one additional CN operator taking part in a shared network
in another location area of the shared network defined by the same
common PLMN identity, the RNC for UTRAN Iu mode or the BSC for A/Gb mode
shall send a location registration reject message with the reject cause
\#15 to the MS.

######## Annex O (normative): 3GPP capability exchange protocol 
