
I.1 Causes related to nature of request
=======================================

Cause value = 8 Operator Determined Barring

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
service was rejected by the SGSN due to Operator Determined Barring.

Cause value = 24 MBMS bearer capabilities insufficient for the service

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that an MBMS context
activation request was rejected by the network, because the MBMS bearer
capabilities are insufficient for the MBMS service.

Cause value = 25 LLC or SNDCP failure (A/Gb mode only)

This cause code is used by the MS indicate that a PDP context is
deactivated because of a LLC or SNDCP failure (e.g. if the SM receives a
*SNSM-STATUS.request* message with cause \"*DM received* \" or \"
*invalid XID response* \", see 3GPP TS 44.065 \[78\])

Cause value = 26 Insufficient resources

This cause code is used by the MS or by the network to indicate that a
PDP context activation request, secondary PDP context activation
request, PDP context modification request, or MBMS context activation
request cannot be accepted due to insufficient resources.

Cause value = 27 Missing or unknown APN

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
service was rejected by the external packet data network because the
access point name was not included although required, or if the access
point name could not be resolved.

Cause value = 28 Unknown PDP address or PDP type

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
service was rejected by the external packet data network because the PDP
address or type could not be recognised.

Cause value = 29 User authentication failed

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
service was rejected by the external packet data network due to a failed
user authentication.

Cause value = 30 Activation rejected by GGSN, Serving GW or PDN GW

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
service was rejected by the GGSN, Serving GW or PDN GW.

Cause value = 31 Activation rejected, unspecified

This cause code is used by the network or by the MS to indicate that the
requested service was rejected due to unspecified reasons.

Cause value = 32 Service option not supported

This cause code is used by the network when the MS requests a service
which is not supported by the PLMN.

Cause value = 33 Requested service option not subscribed

See Annex G, clause 4.

Cause value = 34 Service option temporarily out of order

See Annex G, clause 4.

Cause value = 35 NSAPI already used

This cause code may be used by a network to indicate that the NSAPI
requested by the MS in the PDP context activation request is already
used by another active PDP context of this MS.

Never to be sent, but can be received from a R97/R98 network at PDP
context activation

Cause value = 36 Regular deactivation

This cause code is used to indicate a regular MS or network initiated
PDP context deactivation or a regular network initiated MBMS context
deactivation.

Cause value = 37 QoS not accepted

This cause code is used by the MS if the new QoS cannot be accepted that
were indicated by the network in the PDP Context Modification procedure.

Cause value = 38 Network failure

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
service is rejected due to an error situation in the network.

Cause value = 39 Reactivation requested

This cause code is used by the network to request a PDP context
reactivation (e.g. after a GGSN restart or after selection of a
different GGSN by the network for Selected IP Traffic Offload).

Cause value = 40 Feature not supported

This cause code is used by the MS to indicate that the PDP context
activation or the MBMS context activation initiated by the network is
not supported by the MS.

Cause value = 41 semantic error in the TFT operation.

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that there
is a semantic error in the TFT operation included in a secondary PDP
context activation request or an MS-initiated PDP context modification
or a network requested secondary PDP context activation.

Cause value = 42 syntactical error in the TFT operation.

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that there
is a syntactical error in the TFT operation included in a secondary PDP
context activation request or an MS-initiated PDP context modification
or a network requested secondary PDP context activation.

Cause value = 43 unknown PDP context

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that the
PDP context identified by the Linked TI IE in the secondary PDP context
activation request or a network requested secondary PDP context
activation is not active.

Cause value = 44 semantic errors in packet filter(s)

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that there
is one or more semantic errors in packet filter(s) of the TFT included
in a secondary PDP context activation request or an MS-initiated PDP
context modification or a network requested secondary PDP context
activation.

Cause value = 45 syntactical error in packet filter(s)

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that there
is one or more syntactical errors in packet filter(s) of the TFT
included in a secondary PDP context activation request or an
MS-initiated PDP context modification or a network requested secondary
PDP context activation.

Cause value = 46 PDP context without TFT already activated

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that it has
already activated a PDP context without TFT.

Cause value = 47 Multicast group membership time-out

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the MBMS context
is deactivated because the timer supervising the IGMP group membership
interval (see RFC 3376 \[107\], subclause 8.4) or the MLD multicast
listener interval (see RFC 2710 \[108\], subclause 7.4, and
RFC 3810 \[148\], subclause 9.4) expired.

Cause value = 48 Request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation

This cause code is used by the network or the MS to indicate that the
requested service was rejected because of Bearer Control Mode violation.

Cause value = 50 PDP type IPv4 only allowed

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that only PDP type
IPv4 is allowed for the requested PDN connectivity.

Cause value = 51 PDP type IPv6 only allowed

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that only PDP type
IPv6 is allowed for the requested PDN connectivity.

Cause value = 52 single address bearers only allowed

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the requested
PDN connectivity is accepted with the restriction that only single IP
version bearers are allowed.

Cause value = 56 Collision with network initiated request.

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the MS-initiated
request was rejected since the network has requested a secondary PDP
context activation for the same service using a network-initiated
procedure.

Cause value = 57 PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that only PDP types
IPv4, IPv6 or IPv4v6 are allowed for the requested PDN connectivity.

Cause value = 58 PDP type non IP only allowed

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that only PDP type
non IP is allowed for the requested PDN connectivity.

Cause value = 60 Bearer handling not supported

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the procedure
requested by the MS was rejected because the bearer handling is not
supported.

Cause value = 65 Maximum number of PDP contexts reached

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the procedure
requested by the MS was rejected as the network has reached the maximum
number of simultaneously active PDP contexts for the MS.

Cause value = 66 Requested APN not supported in current RAT and PLMN
combination

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the procedure
requested by the MS was rejected because the requested APN is not
supported in the current RAT and PLMN.

Cause value = 112 APN restriction value incompatible with active PDP
context.

This cause code is used by the network to indicate that the PDP
context(s) or MBMS context(s) have an APN restriction value that is not
allowed in combination with a currently active PDP context. Restriction
values are defined in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\], subclause 15.4.

Cause value = 113 Multiple accesses to a PDN connection not allowed

This ESM cause is used by the network to indicate that multiple accesses
to a PDN connection for NBIFOM is not allowed.
