
G.6 Additional cause codes for GMM
==================================

Cause value = 7 GPRS services not allowed

This cause is sent to the MS when it is not allowed to operate GPRS
services.

Cause value = 8 GPRS services and non-GPRS services not allowed

This cause is sent to the MS when it is not allowed to operate either
GPRS or non-GPRS services.

Cause value = 9 MS identity cannot be derived by the network

This cause is sent to the MS when the network cannot derive the MS\'s
identity from the P-TMSI/GUTI, e.g. because no matching identity/context
can be found in the network.

Cause value = 10 Implicitly detached

This cause is sent to the MS either if the network has implicitly
detached the MS, e.g. some while after the mobile reachable timer has
expired, or if the GMM context data related to the subscription dose not
exist in the SGSN e.g. because of a SGSN restart, or because of a
periodic routing area update request routed to a new SGSN.

Cause value = 14 GPRS services not allowed in this PLMN

This cause is sent to the MS which requests GPRS service, or if the
network initiates a detach request in a PLMN which does not offer
roaming for GPRS services to that MS.

Cause value = 16 MSC temporarily not reachable

This cause is sent to the MS if it requests a combined GPRS attach or
routing are updating in a PLMN where the MSC is temporarily not
reachable via the GPRS part of the network.

Cause value = 28 SMS provided via GPRS in this routing area

This cause is sent to the MS if the SGSN decides not to establish a Gs
association since the MS is supposed to send and receive short messages
via GPRS.

Cause value = 40 No PDP context activated

This cause is sent to the MS if the MS requests an establishment of the
radio access bearers for all active PDP contexts by sending a SERVICE
REQUEST message indicating \"data\" to the network, but the SGSN does
not have any active PDP context(s).

########  Annex H (informative): 3GPP specific cause values for call control
