
C.2 Principles
==============

C.2.1 Definition of types of information
----------------------------------------

There are three different types of information that the calling PLMN
user may specify during call setup to identify low layer capabilities
needed in the network and in the destination terminal:

a\) type I information is information about the calling terminal which is
only used at the destination end to allow a decision regarding terminal
compatibility. An example would be the user information layer 3
protocol. Type I information is encoded in octets 5 to 7 of the low
layer compatibility information element;

b\) type II information is only used by the network (PLMN) to which the
calling user is connected for selection of PLMN specific network
resources, e.g. channel type or specific functionality within the
interworking function (IWF, see 3GPP TS 23.093 \[88a\]). This type of
information is always present. An example is the connection element.
Type II information is coded in:

i\) octet 3 of the bearer capability information element when the
information transfer capability required by the calling user is speech ;

ii\) octets 3, 4, 5, and optionally octet 7 of the bearer capability
information element when the information transfer capability required by
the calling user is not speech;

c\) type III information is required for selection of a basic service
from the choice of basic services offered by the network and together
with type II information for selection of an appropriate interworking
function (IWF, see 3GPP TS 29.007 \[38\]), as well as for terminal
compatibility checking at the destination terminal. An example is the
information transfer capability. Type III information is always present
and is encoded in:

i\) octet 3 of the bearer capability information element when the
information transfer capability required by the calling user is speech ;

ii\) octets 3, 5, 6, 6a, 6b and 6c of the bearer capability information
element when the information transfer capability required by the calling
user is not speech;

C.2.2 Examination by network
----------------------------

Type I information is user-to-user (i.e. at the calling side not
examined by network) while type II and III information should be
available for examination by the destination user and the network.

NOTE: In the case of a mobile terminated call, if the type II and type
III information is not sufficient for the selection of an appropriate
interworking function, the type I information will also examined by the
network.

C.2.3 Location of type I information
------------------------------------

Type I information (i.e. terminal information only significant to the
called user) shall, when used, be included in the low layer
compatibility information element.

C.2.4 Location of types II and III information
----------------------------------------------

Type II information is included in the bearer capability information
element. Type III information is also included in the bearer capability
information element. The network may use and modify type III information
(e.g. to provide interworking).

In any case a modification of the bearer capability information element
has to be performed when interworking to the fixed network (e.g. ISDN)
is required, where the signalling of the radio interface has to be
mapped to fixed network signalling (e.g. mapping of GSM BCIE to ISDN
BCIE, see 3GPP TS 29.007 \[38\]).

C.2.5 Relationship between bearer capability and low layer compatibility information elements
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There shall be no contradiction of information between the low layer
compatibility and the bearer capability at the originating side.
However, as some bearer capability code points may be modified during
the transport of the call (e.g. by the interworking function), this
principle implies that there should be minimal duplication of
information between the bearer capability information element and the
low layer compatibility information element.

NOTE: If as a result of duplication, a contradiction occurs at the
terminating side between the bearer capability information element and
the low layer compatibility information element at the terminating side,
the receiving entity shall ignore the conflicting information in the low
layer compatibility information element.

########  Annex D (informative): Examples of bearer capability information element coding

This annex gives examples of the coding of bearer capability information
elements for various telecommunication services. This annex is included
for information purposes only. In the case of any inconsistency between
this annex and 3GPP TS 27.001 \[36\], then 3GPP TS 27.001 \[36\] shall
take precedence over this annex.
