
6 Support for packet services
=============================

This chapter contains the description of the procedures for the session
management of GPRS point-to-point data services and MBMS point-to-point
and point-to-multipoint data services at the radio interface (Reference
point Uu and Um).

6.1 GPRS Session management
---------------------------

### 6.1.1 General

The main function of the session management (SM) is to support PDP
context handling of the user terminal. Furthermore, the SM supports the
MBMS context handling within the MS and the network, which allows the MS
to receive data from a specific MBMS source.

The SM comprises procedures for

\- identified PDP context activation, deactivation and modification; and

\- identified MBMS context activation and deactivation.

SM procedures for identified access can only be performed if a GMM
context has been established between the MS and the network. If no GMM
context has been established, the MM sublayer has to initiate the
establishment of a GMM context by use of the GMM procedures as described
in chapter 4. After GMM context establishment, SM uses services offered
by GMM (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]). Ongoing SM procedures are suspended
during GMM procedure execution.

The SM procedures for identified MBMS context activation and
deactivation can only be performed, if in addition to the GMM context
the MS has a PDP context activated.

In Iu mode only, integrity protected signalling (see subclause 4.1.1.1.1
of the present document and in general, see 3GPP TS 33.102 \[5a\]) is
mandatory. In Iu mode only, all protocols shall use integrity protected
signalling. Integrity protection of all SM signalling messages is the
responsibility of lower layers. It is the network which activates
integrity protection. This is done using the security mode control
procedure (3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\] and 3GPP TS 44.118 \[111\]).

For the session management protocol, the extended TI mechanism may be
used (see 3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]).

### 6.1.2 Session management states

In this subclause, the SM states are described for one SM entity (see
3GPP TS 24.007 \[20\]). Each SM entity is associated with one PDP
context or MBMS context. Subclause 6.1.2.1 describes the SM states in
the MS and subclause 6.1.2.2 describes the SM states on the network
side.

#### 6.1.2.1 Session management states in the MS

In this subclause, the possible states of an SM entity in the mobile
station are described. As illustrated in figure 6.1/3GPP TS 24.008 and
6.1a/3GPP TS 24.008 there are seven SM states in the MS.

##### 6.1.2.1.1 PDP-INACTIVE

This state indicates that neither PDP context nor MBMS context exist.

##### 6.1.2.1.2 PDP-ACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when PDP context activation was requested by the MS.

##### 6.1.2.1.3 PDP-INACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when deactivation of the PDP contexts was requested by
the MS.

##### 6.1.2.1.4 PDP-ACTIVE

This state indicates that the PDP context is active.

##### 6.1.2.1.5 PDP-MODIFY\_PENDING 

This state exists when modification of the PDP context was requested by
the MS.

##### 6.1.2.1.6 MBMS-ACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when the MS has requested the network to activate an
MBMS context.

##### 6.1.2.1.7 MBMS-ACTIVE

This state indicates that the MBMS context is active.

Figure 6.1/3GPP TS 24.008: Session management states for PDP context
handling in the MS (overview)

It shall be noted, that Figure 6.1/3GPP TS 24.008 applies to both the
PDP context activation procedure and the secondary PDP context
activation procedure, though the distinction in messages regarding the
activation of PDP contexts is not shown here for simplicity.

Figure 6.1a/3GPP TS 24.008: Session management states for MBMS context
handling in the MS (overview)

#### 6.1.2.2 Session management states on the network side

In this subclause, the possible states of an SM entity on the network
side are described. As illustrated in figures 6.2/3GPP TS 24.008 and
6.2a/3GPP TS 24.008 there are eight SM states on the network side.

##### 6.1.2.2.1 PDP-INACTIVE

This state indicates that the PDP context or MBMS context is not active.

##### 6.1.2.2.2 PDP-ACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when the PDP context activation was initiated by the
network.

##### 6.1.2.2.3 PDP-INACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when deactivation of the PDP context was requested by
the network.

##### 6.1.2.2.4 PDP-ACTIVE

This state indicates that the PDP context is active.

##### 6.1.2.2.5 PDP-MODIFY-PENDING

This state exists when modification of the PDP context was requested by
the network.

##### 6.1.2.2.6 MBMS-ACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when the network has initiated MBMS context
activation.

##### 6.1.2.2.7 MBMS-INACTIVE-PENDING

This state exists when the network has requested the MS to deactivate an
MBMS context.

##### 6.1.2.2.8 MBMS-ACTIVE

This state indicates that the MBMS context is active.

Figure 6.2/3GPP TS 24.008: Session management states for PDP context
handling on the network side (overview)

It shall be noted, that figure 6.2/3GPP TS 24.008 applies to both the
PDP context activation procedure and the secondary PDP context
activation procedure, though the distinction in messages regarding the
activation of PDP contexts is not shown here for simplicity.

Figure 6.2a/3GPP TS 24.008: Session management states for MBMS context
handling on the network side (overview)

### 6.1.2A PDP address allocation

#### 6.1.2A.1 General

PDP addresses are handled differently for PDN interworking of type PPP
and IP (IPv4 or IPv6).

##### 6.1.2A.1.1 Interworking with PDN based on IP

During PDP context activation (see subclause 6.1.3.1), the MS can
configure an IPv4 address, or obtain an IPv6 interface identifier to be
used during the IETF-based IP address allocation after PDP context
establishment.

The MS can obtain an IPv4 address or an IPv6 prefix via an IETF-based IP
address allocation mechanism once the PDP context is established.

The following IETF-based IP address/prefix allocation methods are
specified for GPRS (the corresponding procedures are specified in
3GPP TS 29.061 \[130\]):

a\) /64 IPv6 default prefix allocation via IPv6 stateless address
autoconfiguration. Optionally, allocation of additional IPv6 prefix(es)
with length /64 or shorter via stateful DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation (see
IETF RFC 3633 \[139\]);

b\) IPv4 address allocation and IPv4 parameter configuration via DHCPv4;

Upon deactivation of a default PDP context, the MS shall locally release
any IPv4 address or IPv6 prefix allocated to the MS for the
corresponding PDN connection.

##### 6.1.2A.1.2 Interworking with PDN based on PPP

During PDP context activation no PDP address is configured. Instead,
such information is negotiated and configured during the NCP phase of
PPP.

#### 6.1.2A.2 IP address allocation via NAS signalling

The MS shall set the PDP type in the PDP address IE in the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message when requesting establishment of a default PDP
context; the detailed rules with regards to IP version for MS and
network side are defined in subclause 6.1.3.1.

If the MS wants to use DHCPv4 for IPv4 address assignment, it shall
indicate that to the network within the Protocol Configuration Options
IE in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST.

If the MS requests allocation of an IPv6 address, the network constructs
it of two parts: a /64 IPv6 prefix and an interface identifier of 64
bits length. The IPv6 prefix part is not used immediately by the MS;
however, the network shall use the same IPv6 prefix in subsequent
procedures for IETF-based IP address allocation. The interface
identifier is only used for building a unique link-local IPv6 address.

### 6.1.3 Session Management procedures

#### 6.1.3.0 General

The MS\'s maximum number of active PDP contexts in a PLMN is determined
by the lowest of the maximum number of Network Service Access Point
Identifiers (NSAPIs) allowed by the protocol (as specified in
subclause 10.5.6.2), the PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP contexts in Iu or
A/Gb mode and the MS\'s implementation-specific maximum number of PDP
contexts.

NOTE: Subclauses 6.1.3.1.3 and 6.1.3.2.2 specify how the MS determines
the PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP contexts in Iu or A/Gb mode.

#### 6.1.3.1 PDP context activation

The purpose of this procedure is to establish a PDP context between the
MS and the network for a specific QoS on a specific NSAPI. The PDP
context activation may be initiated by the MS or the initiation may be
requested by the network.

An MS attached for emergency bearer services shall only request a PDP
context with request type set to \"emergency\". If there already is a
PDN connection for emergency bearer services established, the MS shall
not request an additional PDN connection for emergency bearer services.
The MS shall not request emergency bearer services in A/Gb mode or in
GERAN Iu mode.

If the MS has reached the maximum number of active PDP contexts (see
subclause 6.1.3.0) and the upper layers of the MS request activation of
additional PDP context, then the MS shall not send an ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message or an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message to activate the additional PDP context. If the additional PDP
context is a PDP context with type set to \"emergency\", then it may
skip explicit deactivation to free PDP context resources and instead
re-activate the necessary context(s) relying on network handling of
abnormal cases as specified in subclause 6.1.3.1.5 case c). In either
case it is an MS implementation option which PDP context(s) to re-use
for emergency.

Each PDP address may be described by one or more PDP contexts in the MS
or the network. The PDP Context Activation procedure is used to activate
the default PDP context for a given PDP address and APN, i.e. a PDN
connection, whereas all additional contexts associated to the same PDP
address and APN are activated with the secondary PDP context activation
procedure. An MS supporting S1 mode shall keep the default PDP context
activated during the lifetime of the PDN connection. An MS not
supporting S1 mode should apply the same behaviour (see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]). When more than one PDP context is associated to
a PDP address, there shall be a Traffic Flow Template (TFT), including
one or more packet filters, for each or all but one context. The
downlink and uplink packet filters are considered separately. If
present, the TFT shall be sent transparently either from the MS via the
SGSN to the GGSN to enable packet classification and policing for
downlink data transfer in the GGSN or from the GGSN via the SGSN to the
MS to be used in a network requested secondary PDP context activation
procedure (see subclause 6.1.3.2) and enable packet classification and
policing for uplink data transfer in the MS (see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

For the purpose of requesting non-IP connectivity, the MS shall set the
PDP type number in the Requested PDP address information element in the
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message to \"non IP\". The MS supporting
non-IP connectivity shall also support the extended protocol
configuration options IE.

For the purpose of requesting IP address allocation the MS shall set the
PDP type number in the Requested PDP address information element in the
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message based on its IP stack configuration
(e.g. the per APN settings specified in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]) as
follows:

a\) An MS, which is IPv6 and IPv4 capable, and

\- has not been allocated an IP address for this APN, shall set the PDP
type number to \"IPv4v6 address\";

\- has been allocated an IPv4 address for this APN and received the SM
cause \#52, \"single address bearers only allowed\", and is requesting
an IPv6 address, shall set the PDP type number to \"IPv6 address\";

\- has been allocated an IPv6 address for this APN and received the SM
cause \#52, \"single address bearers only allowed\", and is requesting
an IPv4 address, shall set the PDP type number to \"IPv4 address\".

b\) An MS, which is only IPv4 capable, shall set the PDP type number to
\"IPv4 address\".

c\) An MS, which is only IPv6 capable, shall set the PDP type number to
\"IPv6 address\".

d\) When the IP version capability of the MS is unknown in the MS (as in
the case when the MT and TE are separated and the capability of the TE
is not known in the MT), the MS shall set the PDP type number to
\"IPv4v6 address\".

On receipt of the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message sent by the MS,
the network when allocating an IP address shall take into account the
PDP type number, the operator policies of the home and visited network,
and the user\'s subscription data.

\- If the MS requests PDP type IPv4v6, but the network configuration
dictates the use of IPv4 addressing only or IPv6 addressing only for
this APN, the network shall override the PDP type requested by the MS to
a single address PDP type (IPv4 or IPv6). In the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
ACCEPT message sent to the MS, the network sets the PDP type number to
either \"IPv4 address\" or \"IPv6 address\" and the SM cause to \#50
\"PDP type IPv4 only allowed\", or \#51 \"PDP type IPv6 only allowed\",
respectively (see subclause 6.1.3.1.1).

\- If the MS requests PDP type IPv4v6, but the operator uses single
addressing per PDP context due to interworking with nodes of earlier
releases, the network shall override the PDP type requested by setting
the PDP type in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message sent to the MS
to a single address PDP type. In the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message
sent to the MS, the network sets the PDP type number to either \"IPv4
address\" or \"IPv6 address\" and the SM cause to \#52, \"single address
bearers only allowed\" (see subclause 6.1.3.1.1).

The MS, in a pre release 8 network not supporting IPv4/v6, could
encounter other network reactions:

\- If the MS requests PDP type IPv4v6, and the PDP type is changed to
PDP type IPv4 and no SM cause is included, the MS should request another
PDP context for PDP type IPv6 to the same APN.

NOTE: Some networks can respond with ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REJECT with SM
cause \#28 \"unknown PDP address or PDP type\". In that instance, the MS
can attempt to establish dual-stack connectivity by performing two PDP
context activation request procedures to activate an IPv4 PDP context
and an IPv6 PDP context, both to the same APN.

##### 6.1.3.1.1 Successful PDP context activation initiated by the mobile station

In order to request a PDP context activation, the MS sends an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message to the network, enters the state
PDP-ACTIVE-PENDING and starts timer T3380. The message contains the
selected NSAPI, PDP type number and requested QoS. The MS shall ensure
that the selected NSAPI is not currently being used by another Session
Management entity in the MS. The MS may indicate the support of Network
Requested Bearer Control procedures, the support of local IP address in
TFTs or the 3GPP PS data off UE status in the protocol configuration
options information element. The MS supporting S1 mode shall indicate
subscribed, interactive or background traffic class in the QoS
requested. The MS not supporting S1 mode should indicate subscribed,
interactive or background traffic class in the QoS requested. If there
is a subscribed QoS profile available for the MS, the network may ignore
the requested QoS and apply the subscribed QoS profile (see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

The MS shall set the request type to \"initial request\" when the MS is
establishing connectivity to an additional PDN for the first time, i.e.
when it is an initial attach to that PDN. The MS shall set the request
type to \"handover\" when the connectivity to a PDN is established upon
handover from a non-3GPP access network and the MS was connected to that
PDN before the handover to the 3GPP access network. If the MS is
establishing connectivity for emergency bearer services it shall set the
request type to \"emergency\" and not include an APN in the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message.

Upon receipt of the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with request
type set to \"emergency\" the network shall use the APN or the GGSN/PDN
GW configured for emergency bearer services.

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with a PDP type
number \"IPv4v6 address\" in the Requested PDP address information
element, the network shall on sending the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT
message:

\- include the SM cause information element with cause \#50 \"PDP type
IPv4 only allowed\", if the requested PDN connectivity is accepted with
the restriction that only PDP type IPv4 is allowed; or

\- include the SM cause information element with cause \#51 \"PDP type
IPv6 only allowed\", if the requested PDN connectivity is accepted with
the restriction that only PDP type IPv6 is allowed; or

\- include the SM cause information element with cause \#52 \"single
address bearers only allowed\", if the requested PDN connectivity is
accepted with the restriction that only single IP version bearers are
allowed.

If the MS receives the SM cause value \#50 \"PDP type IPv4 only
allowed\" or \#51 \"PDP type IPv6 only allowed\" in the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the MS shall not subsequently request another
PDP context to get a PDP Type different from the one allowed by the
network, until:

\- all PDP contexts to the given APN are deactivated either explicitly
between the MS and the network, i.e. PDP context deactivation procedure,
or implicitly (without peer to peer signalling between the MS and the
network) as a result of:

i\) PDP context synchronization during routing area updating or service
request procedure;

ii\) PDP context deactivation initiated by the network,

iii\) detach from GPRS services; or;

iv\) a service request procedure is rejected with a cause which results
in the MS entering state GMM-DEREGISTERED; or

\- the PDP type which is used to access to the APN is changed.

NOTE 1: Request to send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
with a specific PDP type comes from upper layers.

If the MS receives the SM cause value \#52 \"single address bearers only
allowed\" in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the MS should
subsequently request another PDP context for the other PDP type to the
same APN with a single address PDP type (IPv4 or IPv6) other than the
one already activated.

NOTE 2: If the MT and TE are separated, the MS might not be able to use
SM cause \#52 \"single address bearers only allowed\" as a trigger for
activating a second single-IP-stack PDP context.

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the network
selects a radio priority level based on the QoS negotiated and may reply
with an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

If the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message included a low priority
indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\",
the network shall store the NAS signalling low priority indication
within the default PDP context.

If the network receives an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with the
same combination of APN and PDP type as an already existing PDN
connection, and multiple PDN connections for a given APN are allowed,
the network may retain the existing PDP contexts and proceed with the
requested PDP context activation procedure.

Upon receipt of the message ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT the MS shall
stop timer T3380, shall enter the state PDP-ACTIVE. If the protocol
configuration options information element is present, the network may
indicate the Bearer Control Mode that shall be used, the network support
of local IP address in TFTs, or the 3GPP PS data off support indication.
If the protocol configuration options information element is not present
or the Selected Bearer Control Mode parameter is not present in the
protocol configuration options information element, the MS shall apply
Bearer Control Mode \'MS only\' for all active PDP contexts sharing the
same PDP Address and APN. If the 3GPP PS data off UE status is
\"activated\", the MS behaves as described in subclause 4.7.1.10. If the
offered QoS parameters received from the network differ from the QoS
requested by the MS, the MS shall either accept the negotiated QoS or
initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure. If the Request type
information element is not present, the network shall assume that the
request type is \"initial request\".

NOTE 3: If the MS requested a value for a QoS parameter that is not
within the range specified by 3GPP TS 23.107 \[81\], the network should
negotiate the parameter to a value that lies within the specified range.

If the lower layers provide a L-GW Transport Layer Address value
together with the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message and a PDN
connection is established as a LIPA PDN connection due to the ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, then the SGSN shall store the L-GW
Transport Layer Address value as the GGSN address in the PDP context of
the LIPA PDN connection. If connectivity with the requested APN is
accepted and the network considers this PDN connection a LIPA PDN
connection, then subject to operator policy the SGSN shall include in
the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message the Connectivity type IE
indicating \"the PDN connection is considered a LIPA PDN connection\".

If the lower layers provide a SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address value
identifying a L-GW together with the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message and a PDN connection is established as a SIPTO at the local
network PDN connection due to the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message,
then the SGSN shall store the SIPTO L-GW Transport Layer Address value
as the P-GW address in the PDP context of the SIPTO at the local network
PDN connection.

If the lower layers provide a LHN-ID value together with the ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message and a PDN connection is established as a
SIPTO at the local network PDN connection due to the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message, then the SGSN shall store the LHN-ID value in
the PDP context of the SIPTO at the local network PDN connection.

NOTE 4: The receipt of a LHN-ID value during the establishment of the
PDN connection, during routing area updating procedure or during
inter-SGSN handover can be used as an indication by the SGSN that the
SIPTO at the local network PDN connection is established to a
stand-alone GW (see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

In A/Gb mode, the MS shall initiate establishment of the logical link
for the LLC SAPI indicated by the network with the offered QoS and
selected radio priority level if no logical link has been already
established for that SAPI. If the offered QoS parameters received from
the network differ from the QoS requested by the MS, the MS shall either
accept the negotiated QoS or initiate the PDP context deactivation
procedure. If the LLC SAPI indicated by the network can not be supported
by the MS, the MS shall initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure.

In Iu mode, both the network and the MS shall store the LLC SAPI and the
radio priority in the PDP context. If a Iu mode to A/Gb mode system
change is performed, the new SGSN shall initiate establishment of the
logical link using the negotiated QoS profile, the negotiated LLC SAPI,
and selected radio priority level stored in the PDP context as in a A/Gb
mode to A/Gb mode Routing Area Update.

An MS, which is capable of operating in A/Gb mode, shall use a valid LLC
SAPI, while an MS which is not capable of operating in A/Gb mode shall
indicate the LLC SAPI value as \"LLC SAPI not assigned\" in order to
avoid unnecessary value range checking and any other possible confusion
in the network. When the MS uses a valid LLC SAPI, the network shall
return a valid LLC SAPI. The network shall return the \"LLC SAPI not
assigned\" value only when the MS uses the \"LLC SAPI not assigned\"
value.

NOTE 5: The radio priority level and the LLC SAPI parameters, though not
used in Iu mode, shall be included in the messages, in order to support
handover between Iu mode and A/Gb mode networks.

If a WLAN offload indication information element is included in the
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the MS shall store the WLAN offload
acceptability values for this PDN connection and use the UTRAN offload
acceptability value to determine whether this PDN connection is
offloadable to WLAN or not.

At inter-system change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode, SM shall locally
deactivate the active PDP context(s) if SM does not have the following
parameters:

\- LLC SAPI; and

\- radio priority.

Upon receipt of the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message with the
Connectivity type IE indicating \"the PDN connection is considered a
LIPA PDN connection\", the MS provides an indication to the upper layers
that the connectivity is provided by a LIPA PDN connection.

##### 6.1.3.1.2 Successful PDP context activation requested by the network

In order to request a PDP context activation, the network sends a
REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message to the MS and starts timer T3385.
The message contains an offered PDP address. If available, the APN shall
be included in the REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message.

Upon receipt of a REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message if an APN is
indicated in the message and the timer T3396 is running for the APN, the
MS shall stop the timer T3396, and then either initiate the PDP context
activation procedure as described in the previous subclause or reject
the activation request by sending a REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION
REJECT message as described in subclause 6.1.3.1.4. If the REQUEST PDP
CONTEXT ACTIVATION message did not contain an APN, then the MS shall
stop the timer T3396 associated with no APN. The value of the reject
cause IE of the REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT message shall
indicate the reason for rejection, e.g. \"insufficient resources to
activate another context\".

The ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message sent by the MS in order to
initiate the PDP context activation procedure shall contain the PDP
address, PDP Type and APN requested by the network in the REQUEST PDP
CONTEXT ACTIVATION message.

Upon receipt of the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the network
shall stop timer T3385.

The same procedures then apply as described for MS initiated PDP context
activation.

##### 6.1.3.1.3 Unsuccessful PDP context activation initiated by the MS

###### 6.1.3.1.3.1 General

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message the network may
reject the MS initiated PDP context activation by sending an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REJECT message to the MS. The message shall contain a cause
code that typically indicates one of the following causes:

\# 8: Operator Determined Barring;

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 27: missing or unknown APN;

\# 28: unknown PDP address or PDP type;

\# 29: user authentication failed;

\# 30: activation rejected by GGSN, Serving GW or PDN GW;

\# 31: activation rejected, unspecified;

\# 32: service option not supported;

\# 33: requested service option not subscribed;

\# 34: service option temporarily out of order;

\# 35: NSAPI already used. The network shall not send this cause code
(see note 1);

\# 50: PDP type IPv4 only allowed;

\# 51: PDP type IPv6 only allowed;

\# 57: PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed;

\# 58: PDP type non IP only allowed;

\# 65: maximum number of PDP contexts reached;

\# 66: requested APN not supported in current RAT and PLMN combination;

\# 95 - 111: protocol errors;

\#112: APN restriction value incompatible with active PDP context; or

\#113: Multiple accesses to a PDN connection not allowed.

NOTE 1: Pre-R99 network may send this cause code.

The network may include a Back-off timer value IE in the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REJECT message. If the SM cause value is \#26 \"insufficient
resources\" and if the request type in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
was set to \"emergency\", the network shall not include a Back-off timer
value IE.

If the Back-off timer value IE is included and the SM cause value is
different from \#26 \"insufficient resources\", \#50 \"PDP type IPv4
only allowed\", \#51 \"PDP type IPv6 only allowed\", \#57 \"PDP type
IPv4v6 only allowed\", \#58 \"PDP type non IP only allowed\" and \#65
\"maximum number of PDP contexts reached\", the network may include the
Re-attempt indicator IE to indicate whether the MS is allowed to attempt
a PDN connectivity procedure in the PLMN for the same APN in S1 mode,
and whether another attempt in A/Gb and Iu mode or in S1 mode is allowed
in an equivalent PLMN.

If the SM cause value is \#50 \"PDP type IPv4 only allowed\", \#51 \"PDP
type IPv6 only allowed\", \#57 \"PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed\" or \#58
\"PDP type non IP only allowed\", the network may include the Re-attempt
indicator IE without Back-off timer value IE to indicate whether the MS
is allowed to attempt a PDP context activation procedure in an
equivalent PLMN for the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode using the same PDP
type.

If the SM cause value is \#66 \"requested APN not supported in current
RAT and PLMN combination\", the network may include the Re-attempt
indicator IE without Back-off timer value IE to indicate whether the MS
is allowed to attempt a PDP context activation procedure in an
equivalent PLMN for the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode.

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REJECT message, the MS shall
stop timer T3380 and enter/remain in state PDP-INACTIVE.

If the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message was sent with request type
set to \"emergency\" and the MS receives an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REJECT
message, then the MS may inform the upper layers of the failure to
establish the emergency bearer.

NOTE 2: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of
a CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or
initiating other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures
specified in 3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] can result in the emergency call
being attempted to another IP-CAN.

###### 6.1.3.1.3.2 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is \#26 \"insufficient resources\" and the
Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS shall ignore the Re-attempt
indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions
depending on the timer value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off
timer value IE (if the MS is configured for dual priority, exceptions
are specified in subclause 6.1.3.12; if the MS is an MS configured to
use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in
subclause 6.1.3.11):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated and an APN
was included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the MS shall
stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if it is
running. If the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the
request type was different from \"emergency\", and no APN was included
in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the MS shall stop timer
T3396 associated with no APN if it is running. The MS shall then start
timer T3396 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE and:

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with
exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN
that was sent by the MS, until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is
stopped; and

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without
an APN and with request type different from \"emergency\", or another
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message with exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for a
non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS,
if the APN was not included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
and the request type was different from \"emergency\", until timer T3396
expires or timer T3396 is stopped.

The MS shall not stop timer T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system
change;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS:

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with
exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN
that was sent by the MS, until the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM is
removed or the MS receives a REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION, REQUEST
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
with the same APN from the network or a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message including SM cause \#39 \"reactivation requested\" for a PDP
context which was activated by the MS for the same APN from the network;
and

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without
an APN and with request type different from \"emergency\", or another
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message with exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for a
non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS,
if the APN was not included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
and the request type was different from \"emergency\", until the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives for a
non-emergency PDP context which was activated by the MS any of the
following messages: a REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION without an APN, a
REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for a non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN
sent by the MS, or a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM
cause \#39 \"reactivation requested\" for a non-emergency PDN connection
which was established without an APN sent by the MS.

The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system
change; and

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS:

\- shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if
running, and may send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for
the same APN; and

\- if the APN was not included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with no APN, if running, and may send
an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without an APN, or another
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for a non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN
sent by the MS.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the MS may send
another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN.

The MS may initiate a PDP context activation procedure for emergency
bearer services even if the timer T3396 is running.

If the timer T3396 is running when the MS enters state GMM-DEREGISTERED,
the MS remains switched on, and the SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same,
then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the MS is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, and if the
SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same when the MS is switched on, the MS
shall behave as follows:

\- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let
t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the
MS is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1; and

\- if prior to switch off, timer T3396 was running because an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message containing the
low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" was rejected with a timer value for timer T3396, and if timer
T3396 is restarted at switch on, then the MS configured for dual
priority shall handle session management requests as indicated in
subclause 6.1.3.12.

###### 6.1.3.1.3.3 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause other than SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is different from \#26 \"insufficient resources\",
\#50 \"PDP type IPv4 only allowed\", \#51 \"PDP type IPv6 only
allowed\", \#57 \"PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed\", \#58 \"PDP type non IP
only allowed\", \#65 \"maximum number of PDP contexts reached\", and
\#66 \"requested APN not supported in current RAT and PLMN
combination\", and the Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS shall
take different actions depending on the timer value received in the
Back-off timer value IE (if the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15
in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause 6.1.3.13):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off
timer value IE for the PDP context activation procedure and PLMN and APN
combination and:

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the
PLMN for the same APN that was sent by the MS, until the back-off timer
expires, the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed; and

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the
PLMN without an APN if the APN was not included in the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message, until the back-off timer expires, the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS:

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the
PLMN for the same APN that was sent by the MS, until the MS is switched
off or the SIM/USIM is removed; and

\- shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the
PLMN without an APN if the APN was not included in the ACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message, until the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM is
removed; and

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS:

\- may send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the
same APN; and

\- may send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN without
an APN if the APN was not included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the MS shall ignore
the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

i\) Additionally, if the SM cause value is \#8 \"operator determined
barring\", \#27 \"missing or unknown APN\", \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
shall proceed as follows:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause, using the configured SM\_RetryWaitTime value as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, as back-off timer value; and

\- otherwise, if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that
is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM\_RetryWaitTime value is not
configured, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer.

ii\) For SM cause values different from \#8 \"operator determined
barring\", \#27 \"missing or unknown APN\", \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
behaviour regarding the start of a back-off timer is unspecified.

The MS shall not stop any back-off timer upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change. If the network indicates that a back-off timer for
the PDP context activation procedure and PLMN and APN combination is
deactivated, then it remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change.

NOTE 1: This means the back-off timer can still be running or be
deactivated for the given SM procedure and PLMN and APN combination when
the MS returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back
from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode. Thus the MS can still be prevented from
sending another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the
same APN.

If the back-off timer is started upon receipt of an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REJECT message (i.e. the timer value was provided by the network, a
configured value is available or the default value is used as explained
above) or the back-off timer is deactivated, the MS behaves as follows:

i\) after a PLMN change the MS may send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for the same APN in the new PLMN, if the back-off timer is not
running and is not deactivated for the PDP context activation procedure
and the combination of new PLMN and APN;

Furthermore as an implementation option, for the SM cause values \#8
\"operator determined barring\", \#27 \"missing or unknown APN\", \#32
\"service option not supported\" or \#33 \"requested service option not
subscribed\", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE,
the MS may decide not to automatically send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message for the same APN, if the MS registered to a new PLMN
which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

ii\) if the network does not include the Re-attempt indicator IE to
indicate whether re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, or the MS ignores the
Re-attempt indicator IE, e.g. because the Back-off timer value IE is not
included, then:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall apply the configured SM\_RetryAtRATChange
value as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~
as specified in 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, to determine
whether the MS may attempt a PDN connectivity procedure for the same
PLMN and APN combination in S1 mode; and

\- if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within
the EHPLMN list, or if the NAS configuration MO as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] is not available and the value for inter-system
change is not configured in the USIM file NAS~CONFIG~, then the MS
behaviour regarding a PDN connectivity procedure for the same PLMN and
APN combination in S1 mode is unspecified; and

iii\) if the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE indicating that
re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then depending on the
timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE, for each
combination of a PLMN from the equivalent PLMN list and the APN the MS
shall start a back-off timer for the PDP context activation procedure
with the value provided by the network, or deactivate the respective
back-off timer as follows:

\- If the Re-attempt indicator IE additionally indicates that re-attempt
in S1 mode is allowed, the MS shall start or deactivate the back-off
timer for A/Gb and Iu mode only; and

\- otherwise the MS shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for
A/Gb, Iu, and S1 mode.

If the back-off timer for a PLMN and APN combination was started or
deactivated in S1 mode upon receipt of a PDN CONNECTIVITY REJECT message
(see 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]) and the network indicated that re-attempt
in A/Gb or Iu mode is allowed, then this back-off timer does not prevent
the MS from sending an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in this PLMN
for the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode. If the network indicated that
re-attempt in A/Gb or Iu mode is not allowed, the MS shall not send any
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in this PLMN for the same APN in
A/Gb or Iu mode until the back-off timer expires, the MS is switched off
or the USIM is removed.

NOTE 2: The back-off timer is used to describe a logical model of the
required MS behaviour. This model does not imply any specific
implementation, e.g. as a timer or timestamp.

NOTE 3: Reference to back-off timer in this section can either refer to
use of timer T3396 or to use of a different packet system specific timer
within the MS. Whether the MS uses T3396 as a back-off timer or it uses
different packet system specific timers as back-off timers is left up to
MS implementation. This back-off timer is stopped when the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed.

The MS may initiate a PDP context activation procedure for emergency
bearer services even if the back-off timer is running.

If the SM cause value is \#50 \"PDP type IPv4 only allowed\", \#51 \"PDP
type IPv6 only allowed\", \#57 \"PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed\" or \#58
\"PDP type non IP only allowed\", the MS shall ignore the Back-off timer
value IE provided by the network, if any. The MS shall not automatically
send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN that
was sent by the MS using the same PDP type, until any of the following
conditions is fulfilled:

\- the MS is registered to a new PLMN, and either the network did not
include a Re-attempt indicator IE in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REJECT
message or the Re-attempt indicator IE included in the message indicated
that re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is allowed;

\- the MS is registered to a new PLMN which was not in the list of
equivalent PLMNs at the time when the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REJECT
message was received;

\- the PDP type which is used to access to the APN is changed;

\- the MS is switched off; or

\- the SIM/USIM is removed.

For the SM cause values \#50 \"PDP type IPv4 only allowed\", \#51 \"PDP
type IPv6 only allowed\", \#57 \"PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed\" and \#58
\"PDP type non IP only allowed\" the MS shall ignore the value of the
RATC bit in the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

Furthermore as an implementation option, for the SM cause values \#50
\"PDP type IPv4 only allowed\", \#51 \"PDP type IPv6 only allowed\",
\#57 \"PDP type IPv4v6 only allowed\" and \#58 \"PDP type non IP only
allowed\", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE the
MS may decide not to automatically send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message for the same APN that was sent by the MS using the same
PDP type, if the MS registered to a new PLMN which is in the list of
equivalent PLMNs.

NOTE 4: Request to send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
with a specific PDP type has to come from upper layers.

If the SM cause value is \#65 \"maximum number of PDP contexts
reached\", the MS shall determine the PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP
contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode (see subclause 6.1.3.0) as the number of
active PDP contexts it has. The MS shall ignore the Back-off timer value
IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

NOTE 5: In some situations, when attempting to establish multiple PDP
contexts, the number of active PDP contexts that the MS has when SM
cause \#65 is received is not equal to the maximum number of PDP
contexts reached in the network.

NOTE 6: When the network supports emergency bearer services, it is not
expected that SM cause \#65 is returned by the network when the MS
requests a PDP context for emergency bearer services.

The PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode applies to
the PLMN in which the SM cause \#65 \"maximum number of PDP contexts
reached\" is received. When the MS is switched off or when the USIM is
removed, the MS shall clear all previous determinations representing any
PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode (see
subclause 6.1.3.0). Upon successful registration with a new PLMN, the MS
may clear previous determinations representing any PLMN\'s maximum
number of PDP contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode.

If the SM cause value is \#66 \"requested APN not supported in current
RAT and PLMN combination\", the MS shall take different actions
depending on the Back-off timer value IE and the Re-attempt indicator IE
optionally included:

i\) If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, and either the
Re-attempt indicator IE is not included or the Re-attempt indicator IE
is included indicating that re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is allowed,
the MS shall not send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the
same APN in the current PLMN in A/Gb or Iu mode until the MS is switched
off or the SIM/USIM is removed;

ii\) if the Back-off timer value IE is not included, and the Re-attempt
indicator IE is included and indicates that re-attempt in an equivalent
PLMN is not allowed, the MS shall not send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message for the same APN in any PLMN in the list of equivalent
PLMNs in A/Gb or Iu mode until the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM is
removed; and

iii\) if the Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS shall take
different actions depending on the timer value received in the Back-off
timer value IE:

a\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off
timer value IE for the PLMN and APN combination and shall not send
another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST for the same APN in the current
PLMN in A/Gb or Iu mode until the back-off timer expires, the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed;

b\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same
APN in the current PLMN in A/Gb or Iu mode until the MS is switched off
or the SIM/USIM is removed; and

c\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS may send
an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same APN.

If the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE indicating that
re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then

\- for case a) the MS shall additionally start a back-off timer with the
value provided in the Back-off timer value IE for the PDP context
activation procedure for each combination of a PLMN from the equivalent
PLMN list and the APN; and

\- for case b) the MS shall deactivate the respective back-off timers
for the PDP context activation procedure for each combination of a PLMN
from the equivalent PLMN list and the APN.

For the SM cause value \#66 \"requested APN not supported in current RAT
and PLMN combination\" the MS shall ignore the value of the RATC bit in
the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

As an implementation option, for cases i), iii.a) and iii.b), if the
Re-attempt indicator IE is not included, the MS may decide not to
automatically send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the
same APN in a PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

##### 6.1.3.1.3A Void

##### 6.1.3.1.4 Unsuccessful PDP context activation requested by the network

Upon receipt of the REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message, the MS may
reject the network requested PDP context activation by sending the
REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT message to the network. The
message contains the same TI as included in the REQUEST PDP CONTEXT
ACTIVATION and an additional cause code that typically indicates one of
the following causes:

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 31: activation rejected, unspecified;

\# 40: feature not supported; or

\# 95 - 111: protocol errors.

The network shall stop timer T3385 and enter state PDP-INACTIVE.

##### 6.1.3.1.5 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Expiry of timers

In the mobile station:

On the first expiry of the timer T3380, the MS shall resend the ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST and shall reset and restart timer T3380. This
retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer
T3380, the MS shall release all resources possibly allocated for this
invocation and shall abort the procedure; no automatic PDP context
activation re-attempt shall be performed; and

\- if the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message was sent with request
type set to \"emergency\", then the MS may inform the upper layers of
the failure to establish the emergency bearer.

NOTE: This can result in the upper layers requesting establishment of a
CS emergency call (if not already attempted in the CS domain) or
initiating other implementation specific mechanisms, e.g. procedures
specified in 3GPP TS 24.229 \[95\] can result in the emergency call
being attempted to another IP-CAN.

On the network side:

On the first expiry of the timer T3385, the network shall resend the
message REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION and shall reset and restart timer
T3385. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth
expiry of timer T3385, the network shall release possibly allocated
resources for this activation and shall abort the procedure.

b\) Collision of MS initiated and network requested PDP context
activation

If the MS uses dynamic PDP addressing that turns out to collide with the
network requested PDP address, then there is no detection of collision
specified but left for network implementation.

c\) MS initiated PDP context activation request for an already activated
PDP context (on the network side)

i\) If the network receives a ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with
the same combination of APN, PDP type and PDP address as an already
activated PDP context, the network shall deactivate the existing PDP
context and, if any, all the linked PDP contexts (matching the
combination of APN, PDP type and PDP address), locally without
notification to the MS and proceed with the requested PDP context
activation.

ii\) Alternatively (different combination of APN, PDP type and PDP
address), if the NSAPI matches that of an already activated PDP context,
then the network shall deactivate only the existing PDP context locally
without notification to the MS and proceed with the requested PDP
context activation.

It is an implementation option if the parameters used for comparison
described in clause i) and ii) are the parameters provided in the
(current and previous) ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUESTs or the parameters
which are the result of the application of the selection rules defined
in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\] Annex A.2.

The parameter provided in the current ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST can
not be compared to the actually used parameters (result of application
of selection rules defined in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\] Annex A.2) of the
previously activated PDP contexts.

If the network receives an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with
request type \"emergency\" and there already is a PDN connection for
emergency bearer services existing, the network shall reject the request
with cause code \#31 \"activation rejected, unspecified\".

d\) Network initiated PDP context activation request for an already
activated PDP context (on the mobile station side)

If the MS receives a REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message with the
same combination of APN, PDP type and PDP address as an already
activated PDP context, the MS shall deactivate the existing PDP context
and, if any, all the linked PDP contexts (matching the combination of
APN, PDP type and PDP address) locally without notification to the
network and proceed with the requested PDP context activation.

e\) Additional MS initiated PDP context activation request received from
an MS that is attached for emergency bearer services:

If the MS is attached for emergency bearer services the network shall
only accept the PDP context activation request for emergency services.
The network shall reject any other PDP context activation request with
cause code \#31 \"activation rejected, unspecified\".

f\) Reception of the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message and Bearer
Control Mode violation

If the Selected Bearer Control Mode indicates other value than \'MS
only\' in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message although the protocol
configuration options information element was not present or the MS
Support of Network Requested Bearer Control indicator was not present in
the protocol configuration options information element of the
corresponding ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the MS shall ignore
the Selected Bearer Control Mode parameter received from the network and
apply Bearer Control Mode \'MS only\' for all active PDP contexts
sharing the same PDP Address and APN.

Figure 6.3/3GPP TS 24.008: MS initiated PDP context activation procedure

![](media/image49.emf){width="5.583333333333333in" height="3.5in"}

Figure 6.4/3GPP TS 24.008: Network initiated PDP context activation
procedure

##### 6.1.3.1.6 Handling Activate PDP context request for MS configured for dual priority

If a PDP context exists that was created due to a request including a
low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" and the upper layers of the MS request to activate a PDP
context with the same APN and the low priority indicator set to \"MS is
not configured for NAS signalling low priority\", when initiating the
PDP context activation procedure, the MS shall:

\- send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with the same
combination of APN, PDP type and PDP address as the existing PDP context
to activate a PDP context;

NOTE 1: This option relies on the network handling of abnormal cases as
specified in subclause 6.1.3.1.5 case c).

\- send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with the same
combination of APN and PDP type as the existing PDP context but with a
different PDP address, or without PDP address, to activate a PDP
context; or

\- send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with the same APN after
the successful deactivation of the existing PDP context.

NOTE 2: The above list of options also apply for the case when the
existing PDP context was created due to a request including a low
priority indicator set to \"MS is not configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" and the new request to activate a PDP context with the same
APN contains a low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS
signalling low priority\".

As an alternative the upper layers of the MS can request to activate a
PDP context with a different APN.

#### 6.1.3.2 Secondary PDP Context Activation Procedure

The purpose of this procedure is to establish an additional PDP context
between the MS and the network for a specific Traffic Flow Template
(TFT) and QoS profile on a specific NSAPI, when one or more PDP contexts
has/have already been established for the particular PDP address and
APN. The MS shall include a request for a TFT comprising at least one
packet filter applicable for the uplink direction. Depending on the
selected Bearer Control Mode being \'MS only\' or \'MS/NW\', the
secondary PDP context activation procedure may either be initiated by
the MS or by either the MS or the network, respectively. However, the
network and the MS shall not initiate a secondary PDP context activation
procedure for established PDP context of \"non IP\" PDP type.

The network shall allocate packet filter identifiers and manage packet
filter evaluation precedence for the packet filters added by the
network. The the MS shall allocate packet filter identifiers and manage
packet filter evaluation precedence for the packet filters added by the
MS.

If there is a PDN connection for emergency bearer services established,
the MS shall not initiate a secondary PDP context activation procedure
for this connection unless triggered by the network.

NOTE: 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\] subclause 9.3 specifies that a packet filter
applicable for the downlink direction is not mandatory in a TFT.

##### 6.1.3.2.1 Successful Secondary PDP Context Activation Procedure Initiated by the MS

In order to request a PDP context activation with the same PDP address
and APN as an already active PDP context, the MS shall send an ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message to the network, enter the state
PDP-ACTIVE-PENDING and start timer T3380. The message shall contain the
selected NSAPI. The MS shall ensure that the selected NSAPI is not
currently being used by another Session Management entity in the MS. The
message shall also include a QoS profile, a requested LLC SAPI and the
Linked TI. The QoS profile is the requested QoS. If present, the TFT
shall be sent transparently through the SGSN to the GGSN to enable
packet classification and policing for downlink data transfer. If the
selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and a TFT IE is included in
the ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the MS shall set the
packet filter direction parameter of each packet filter in the TFT to a
value different from \"00\". The MS shall allocate packet filter
identifiers for all packet filters included in the TFT.

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, the network
shall validate the message by verifying the TI given in the Linked TI IE
to be any of the active PDP context(s). The same GGSN address shall be
used by the SGSN as for the already established PDP context(s) for that
PDP address. The network shall select a radio priority level based on
the QoS negotiated and shall reply with an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT ACCEPT message, if the request can be accepted.

NOTE 1: If the MS requested a value for a QoS parameter that is not
within the range specified by 3GPP TS 23.107 \[81\], the network should
negotiate the parameter to a value that lies within the specified range.

Upon receipt of the message ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT, the
MS shall stop timer T3380 and enter the state PDP-ACTIVE. If the offered
QoS parameters received from the network differ from the QoS requested
by the MS, the MS shall either accept the negotiated QoS or initiate the
PDP context deactivation procedure.

In A/Gb mode the MS shall initiate establishment of the logical link for
the LLC SAPI indicated by the network with the offered QoS and selected
radio priority level if no logical link has been already established for
that SAPI. If the LLC SAPI indicated by the network can not be supported
by the MS, the MS shall initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure.

In Iu mode, both SGSN and MS shall store the LLC SAPI and the radio
priority in the PDP context. If an Iu mode to A/Gb mode Routing Area
Update is performed, the new SGSN shall initiate establishment of the
logical link using the negotiated LLC SAPI, the negotiated QoS profile
and selected radio priority level stored in the PDP context as in an
A/Gb mode to A/Gb mode Routing Area Update.

An MS, which is capable of operating in A/Gb mode, shall use a valid LLC
SAPI, while an MS which is not capable of operating in A/Gb mode shall
indicate the LLC SAPI value as \"LLC SAPI not assigned\" in order to
avoid unnecessary value range checking and any other possible confusion
in the network. When the MS uses a valid LLC SAPI, the network shall
return a valid LLC SAPI. The network shall return the "LLC SAPI not
assigned" value only when the MS uses the "LLC SAPI not assigned" value.

NOTE 2: The radio priority level and the LLC SAPI parameters, though not
used in Iu mode, shall be included in the messages, in order to support
handover between Iu mode and A/Gb mode networks.

At inter-system change from Iu mode to A/Gb mode, SM shall locally
deactivate the active PDP context(s) if SM does not have the following
parameters:

\- LLC SAPI; and

\- radio priority.

##### 6.1.3.2.1a Successful Secondary PDP Context Activation Procedure Requested by the network

In order to request a PDP context activation with the same PDP address
and APN as an already active PDP context, the network shall send a
REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message to the MS and start
timer T3385. The message contains the required QoS, Linked TI, and
optionally protocol configuration options and a TFT. The network shall
always include a TFT in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION
message. If present, the TFT shall be sent transparently through the
SGSN to the MS to enable packet classification and policing for uplink
and downlink data transfer. The network shall allocate packet filter
identifiers for all packet filters included in the TFT.

NOTE: A network implementing an earlier release of this specification
can send a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message without any
TFT.

Upon receipt of a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message, if
the MS sent an APN for the establishment of the PDN connection, the MS
shall stop the timer T3396 if it is running for the APN sent by the MS.
If the MS did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN
connection and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS
shall stop the timer T3396 associated with no APN if it is running. If
the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message was received for an
emergency PDN connection, the UE shall not stop the timer T3396
associated with no APN if it is running. For any case, the MS shall then
either initiate the secondary PDP context activation procedure as
described in the subclause 6.1.3.2.1 or shall reject the activation
request by sending a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT
message as described in subclause 6.1.3.2.2a. The value of the reject
cause IE of the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT message
shall indicate the reason for rejection, e.g. \"insufficient resources
to activate another context\".

The MS shall maintain the previously negotiated Bearer Control Mode
(BCM) for all active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP Address and APN
and ignore any BCM parameter, if included in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT ACTIVATION message. If the previously negotiated BCM is \'MS
only\', the MS should reject the PDP context activation (see
subclause 6.1.3.2.2a).

The ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message sent by the MS in
order to initiate the secondary PDP context activation procedure shall
contain the QoS and Linked TI required in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT ACTIVATION message. The MS shall also include a TFT with packet
filters as specified in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION
message.

Upon receipt of the ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the
network shall stop timer T3385.

The same procedures then apply as described for MS initiated secondary
PDP context activation.

##### 6.1.3.2.2 Unsuccessful Secondary PDP Context Activation Procedure initiated by the MS

###### 6.1.3.2.2.1 General

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the
network may reject the MS initiated PDP context activation by sending an
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message to the MS. The message
shall contain a cause code that typically indicates one of the
following:

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 30: activation rejected by GGSN, Serving GW or PDN GW;

\# 31: activation rejected, unspecified;

\# 32: service option not supported;

\# 33: requested service option not subscribed;

\# 34: service option temporarily out of order;

\# 41: semantic error in the TFT operation;

\# 42: syntactical error in the TFT operation;

\# 43: unknown PDP context;

\# 44: semantic errors in packet filter(s);

\# 45: syntactical errors in packet filter(s);

\# 46: PDP context without TFT already activated;

\# 48: request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation;

\# 56: collision with network initiated request;

\# 60: bearer handling not supported;

\# 65: maximum number of PDP contexts reached; or

\# 95 - 111: protocol errors.

The network may include a Back-off timer value IE in the ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message.

If the Back-off timer value IE is included and the SM cause value is
different from \#26 \"insufficient resources\" and \#65 \"maximum number
of PDP contexts reached\", the network may include the Re-attempt
indicator IE to indicate whether the MS is allowed to attempt a bearer
resource allocation procedure in the PLMN for the same APN in S1 mode,
and whether another attempt in A/Gb and Iu mode or in S1 mode is allowed
in an equivalent PLMN.

If the ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message is related to an
already active LIPA PDN connection or SIPTO at the local network PDN
connection, then the network shall reply with an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT REJECT message with cause code \#60 \"bearer handling not
supported\".

If a PDP context for the TI given in the Linked TI IE exists, then the
TFT in the ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message is checked by
the network for different types of TFT IE errors as specified in
subclause 6.1.3.2.3.

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message, the MS
shall stop timer T3380 and enter the state PDP-INACTIVE.

###### 6.1.3.2.2.2 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is \#26 \"insufficient resources\" and the
Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS shall ignore the Re-attempt
indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions
depending on the timer value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off
timer value IE (if the MS is configured for dual priority, exceptions
are specified in subclause 6.1.3.12; if the MS is an MS configured to
use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in
subclause 6.1.3.11):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if it is
running. The MS shall then start timer T3396 with the value provided in
the Back-off timer value IE and not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3,
for the same APN until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped. If
the MS did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN connection
and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS shall stop
timer T3396 associated with no APN, if it is running. The MS shall then
start timer T3396 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE
and not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST without an APN and
with request type different from \"emergency\", or another ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with
exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for a non-emergency
PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS, until timer
T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped. The MS shall not stop timer
T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception
of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN until the MS
is switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives a REQUEST
PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION, REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN or a DEACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM cause \#39 \"reactivation
requested\" for a PDP context which was activated by the MS for the same
APN from the network. If the MS did not send an APN for the
establishment of the PDN connection and the request type was different
from \"emergency\", the MS shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST without an APN and with request type different from
\"emergency\", or another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST with exception of those identified in
subclause 6.1.3.3, for a non-emergency PDN connection established
without an APN sent by the MS, until the MS is switched off or the
SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives any of the following messages: a
REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION without an APN, a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT ACTIVATION or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for a
non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS,
or a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM cause \#39
\"reactivation requested\" for a PDP context which was activated by the
MS for a non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN sent by
the MS. The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change; or

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS:

\- shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if
running, and may send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for
the same APN; and

\- if the MS did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN
connection and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with no APN, if running, and may send
an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without an APN, or another
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for a non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN
sent by the MS.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, the MS may send an
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN.

If the timer T3396 is running when the MS enters state GMM-DEREGISTERED,
the MS remains switched on, and the SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same,
then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the MS is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, and if the
SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same when the MS is switched on, the MS
behaves as follows:

\- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let
t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the
MS is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1; and

\- if prior to switch off, timer T3396 was running because an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message containing the
low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" was rejected with a timer value for timer T3396, and if timer
T3396 is restarted at switch on, then the MS configured for dual
priority shall handle session management requests as indicated in
subclause 6.1.3.12.

###### 6.1.3.2.2.3 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause other than SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is different from \#26 \"insufficient resources\"
and \#65 \"maximum number of PDP contexts reached\", and the Back-off
timer value IE is included, the MS takes different actions depending on
the timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE (if the MS is an
MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN, exceptions are
specified in subclause 6.1.3.13):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off
timer value IE for the secondary PDP context activation procedure and
PLMN and APN combination and not send another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same APN until the back-off
timer expires, the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in
the PLMN for the same APN until the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM
is removed; and

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS may
send an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for
the same APN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the MS shall ignore
the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

i\) Additionally, if the SM cause value is \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
shall proceed as follows:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause, using the configured SM\_RetryWaitTime value as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, as back-off timer value; and

\- otherwise, if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that
is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM\_RetryWaitTime value is not
configured, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer.

ii\) For SM cause values different from \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
behaviour regarding the start of a back-off timer is unspecified.

The MS shall not stop any back-off timer upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change. If the network indicates that a back-off timer for
the secondary PDP context activation procedure and PLMN and APN
combination is deactivated, then it remains deactivated upon a PLMN
change or inter-system change.

NOTE 1: This means the back-off timer can still be running or be
deactivated for the given SM procedure and PLMN and APN combination when
the MS returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back
from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode. Thus the MS can still be prevented from
sending another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the
PLMN for the same APN.

If the back-off timer is started upon receipt of an ACTIVATE SECONDARY
PDP CONTEXT REJECT message (i.e. the timer value was provided by the
network, a configured value is available or the default value is used as
explained above) or the back-off timer is deactivated, the MS behaves as
follows:

i\) after a PLMN change the MS may send an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message for the same APN in the new PLMN, if the back-off timer
is not running and is not deactivated for the secondary PDP context
activation procedure and the combination of new PLMN and APN;

Furthermore as an implementation option, for the SM cause values \#32
\"service option not supported\" or \#33 \"requested service option not
subscribed\", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE,
the MS may decide not to automatically send another ACTIVATE SECONDARY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN, if the MS registered to a
new PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

ii\) if the network does not include the Re-attempt indicator IE to
indicate whether re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, or the MS ignores the
Re-attempt indicator IE, e.g. because the Back-off timer value IE is not
included, then:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall apply the configured SM\_RetryAtRATChange
value as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~
as specified in 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, to determine
whether the MS may attempt a bearer resource allocation procedure for
the same PLMN and APN combination in S1 mode; and

\- if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within
the EHPLMN list, or if the NAS configuration MO as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] is not available and the value for inter-system
change is not configured in the USIM file NAS~CONFIG~, then the MS
behaviour regarding a bearer resource allocation procedure for the same
PLMN and APN combination in S1 mode is unspecified; and

iii\) if the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE indicating that
re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then depending on the
timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE, for each
combination of a PLMN from the equivalent PLMN list and the APN the MS
shall start a back-off timer for the secondary PDP context activation
procedure with the value provided by the network, or deactivate the
respective back-off timer as follows:

\- If the Re-attempt indicator IE additionally indicates that re-attempt
in S1 mode is allowed, the MS shall start or deactivate the back-off
timer for A/Gb and Iu mode only; and

\- otherwise the MS shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for
A/Gb, Iu, and S1 mode.

If the back-off timer for a PLMN and APN combination was started or
deactivated in S1 mode upon receipt of a BEARER RESOURCE ALLOCATION
REJECT message (see 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]) and the network indicated
that re-attempt in A/Gb or Iu mode is allowed, then this back-off timer
does not prevent the MS from sending an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message in this PLMN for the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode. If the
network indicated that re-attempt in A/Gb or Iu mode is not allowed, the
MS shall not send any ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in
this PLMN for the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode, until the timer expires,
the MS is switched off or the USIM is removed.

NOTE 2: The back-off timer is used to describe a logical model of the
required MS behaviour. This model does not imply any specific
implementation, e.g. as a timer or timestamp.

NOTE 3: Reference to back-off timer in this section can either refer to
use of timer T3396 or to use of a different packet system specific timer
within the MS. Whether the MS uses T3396 as a back-off timer or it uses
different packet system specific timers as back-off timers is left up to
MS implementation. This back-off timer is stopped when the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed.

If the SM cause value is \#65 \"maximum number of PDP contexts
reached\", the MS shall determine the PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP
contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode (see subclause 6.1.3.0) as the number of
active PDP contexts it has. The MS shall ignore the Back-off timer value
IE and Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

NOTE 4: In some situations, when attempting to establish multiple PDP
contexts, the number of active PDP contexts that the MS has when cause
\#65 is received is not equal to the maximum number of PDP contexts
reached in the network.

The PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP context in A/Gb or Iu mode applies to
the PLMN in which the SM cause \#65 \"maximum number of PDP contexts
reached\" is received. When the MS is switched off or when the USIM is
removed, the MS shall clear all previous determinations representing any
PLMN\'s maximum number of PDP contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode (see
subclause 6.1.3.0). Upon successful registration with a new PLMN, the MS
may clear previous determinations representing any PLMN\'s maximum
number of PDP contexts in A/Gb or Iu mode.

##### 6.1.3.2.2a Unsuccessful secondary PDP context activation requested by the network

Upon receipt of the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message,
the MS may reject the network requested secondary PDP context activation
by sending the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT message
to the network. The message contains the same TI as included in the
REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION and an additional cause code
that typically indicates one of the following causes:

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 31: activation rejected, unspecified;

\# 40: feature not supported;

\# 41: semantic error in the TFT operation;

\# 42: syntactical error in the TFT operation;

\# 43: unknown PDP context;

\# 44: semantic errors in packet filter(s);

\# 45: syntactical errors in packet filter(s);

\# 46: PDP context without TFT already activated;

\# 48: request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation; or

\# 95 - 111: protocol errors.

The MS should reply with the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION
REJECT message with cause \#48 \"request rejected, Bearer Control Mode
violation\" if the previously negotiated Bearer Control Mode is
\'MS-only\'.

If a PDP context for the TI given in the Linked TI IE exists, then the
TFT in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message is checked
by the MS for different types of TFT IE errors as specified in
subclause 6.1.3.2.3.

Upon receipt of a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT
message, the network shall stop timer T3385 and enter state
PDP-INACTIVE.

##### 6.1.3.2.3 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Expiry of timers

In the mobile station:

On the first expiry of the timer T3380, the MS shall resend the ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST and shall reset and restart timer T3380.
This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of
timer T3380, the MS shall release all resources possibly allocated for
this invocation and shall abort the procedure; no automatic PDP context
activation re-attempt shall be performed.

On the network side:

On the first expiry of the timer T3385, the network shall resend the
message REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION and shall reset and
restart timer T3385. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on
the fifth expiry of timer T3385, the network shall release possibly
allocated resources for this activation and shall abort the procedure.

b\) MS initiated secondary PDP context activation procedure for an
already activated PDP context (On the network side)

If the NSAPI matches that of an already activated PDP context, the
network shall deactivate the existing PDP context locally without
notification to the MS and proceed with the requested PDP context
activation. The case of a TI match is described in subclause 8.3.2.

c\) no PDP context with linked TI activated (on the network side)

The network shall then check whether there is an activated PDP context
for the TI given in the Linked TI IE in the ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message. If there is no active PDP context for the
specified TI, the network shall reply with an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT REJECT message, cause code indicating \"unknown PDP context\".

d\) no PDP context with Linked TI activated (on the mobile station side)

The MS shall check whether there is an activated PDP context for the TI
given in the Linked TI IE in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
ACTIVATION message. If there is no active PDP context for the specified
TI, the MS shall reply with a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION
REJECT message, cause code indicating \"unknown PDP context\".

e\) MS initiated secondary PDP context activation procedure for a PDN
connection established for emergency bearer services (on the network
side)

If the MS initiated secondary PDP context activation procedure is for a
PDN connection established for emergency bearer services the network
shall reply with an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message, cause
code indicating \"activation rejected, unspecified\".

f\) no TFT IE is received in the REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION
message (on the mobile station side)

The MS shall either:

A\) reply with a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT message,
cause code indicating \"semantic error in the TFT operation\"; or

B\) optionally, to support networks compliant with earlier versions of
the protocol, accept the network requested secondary PDP context
activation and proceed as specified in subclause 6.1.3.2.1a. If another
PDP context with the same PDP address and APN without a TFT exists, the
MS shall deactivate this old PDP context without a TFT by explicit
peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the network.

If during a previous inter-system change from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode
the default PDP context linked to the new PDP context was mapped from an
EPS bearer context, the MS shall follow option A.

NOTE 1: A network implementing this version of the protocol will always
include a request for a TFT when requesting the activation of a
non-default PDP context.

If a PDP context for the TI given in the Linked TI IE exists, then the
TFT in the ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or the REQUEST
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION message is checked for different types
of TFT IE errors as follows:

a\) Semantic errors in TFT operations:

1\) When the TFT operation is an operation other than \"Create a new
TFT\".

The network shall reject the activation request with cause \"semantic
error in the TFT operation\".

The MS shall reject the activation request with cause \"semantic error
in the TFT operation\".

b\) Syntactical errors in TFT operations:

1\) When the TFT operation is \"Create a new TFT\" and the packet filter
list in the TFT IE is empty.

2\) Void.

3\) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the
TFT IE, such as a mismatch between the number of packet filters
subfield, and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list.

The network shall reject the activation request with cause \"syntactical
error in the TFT operation\".

The MS shall reject the activation request with cause \"syntactical
error in the TFT operation\".

c\) Semantic errors in packet filters:

1\) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components
which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will
ever fit this packet filter. How the network determines a semantic error
in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

2\) When the resulting TFT does not contain any packet filter applicable
for the uplink direction.

NOTE 2: When BCM=\'MS only\', the MS is allowed to include a TFT with
packet filters without any explicit direction information, i.e. with
value \"00\", and such packet filters are applicable for both uplink and
downlink directions.

The network shall reject the activation request with cause \"semantic
errors in packet filter(s)\".

The MS shall reject the activation request with cause \"semantic errors
in packet filter(s)\".

d\) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

1\) When the TFT operation is \"Create a new TFT\" and two or more packet
filters in the resultant TFT would have identical packet filter
identifiers.

2\) When the TFT operation is \"Create a new TFT\" and two or more packet
filters in all TFTs associated with this PDP address and APN would have
identical packet filter precedence values.

3\) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of
packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter
component identifier.

In case 2) the network shall not diagnose an error, further process the
new activation request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the
old packet filters which have identical filter precedence values.
Furthermore, by means of explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the MS
and the network, the network shall deactivate the PDP context(s) for
which it has deleted the packet filters.

In cases 1) and 3) the network shall reject the activation request with
cause \"syntactical errors in packet filter(s)\".

In case 2) the MS shall not diagnose an error, further process the new
activation request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old
packet filters which have identical filter precedence values.
Furthermore, by means of explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the
network and the MS, the MS shall deactivate the PDP context(s) for which
it has deleted the packet filters.

In cases 1) and 3) the MS shall reject the activation request with cause
\"syntactical errors in packet filter(s)\".

Otherwise, the network shall accept the activation request by replying
to the MS with an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message. In case
of network requested secondary PDP context activation procedure the MS
shall accept the activation request by replying to the network with an
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message.

![](media/image50.emf){width="5.125in" height="1.9722222222222223in"}

Figure 6.5/3GPP TS 24.008: MS initiated secondary PDP context activation
procedure

![](media/image51.png){width="6.694444444444445in"
height="4.222222222222222in"}

Figure 6.5a/3GPP TS 24.008: Network requested secondary PDP context
activation procedure

#### 6.1.3.3 PDP context modification procedure

The PDP context modification procedure is invoked by the network or by
the MS, in order to:

\- inform about the change of the 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDN
connection;

\- change the QoS negotiated;

\- change the Radio priority level; or

\- change the TFT,

negotiated during the PDP context activation procedure, the secondary
PDP context activation procedure or at previously performed PDP context
modification procedures. Depending on the selected Bearer Control Mode
being \'MS only\' or \'MS/NW\', the MS or the network respectively may
also create and delete a TFT of an active default PDP context. The PDP
context modification procedure can be initiated by the network or the MS
at any time when a PDP context is active. The network and the MS shall
manage packet filter identifiers for the packet filters each modifies or
deletes. The network and the MS shall manage packet filter evaluation
precedence for the packet filters each modifies.If the MS changes a TFT,
which is not assigned to a default PDP context, the MS shall ensure that
at least one packet filter applicable for the uplink direction remains
among the packet filters created by the MS in that TFT, or no own packet
filters . If the network changes a TFT, which is not ass igned to a
default PDP context, the network shall ensure that at least one packet
filter applicable for the uplink direction remains among the TFT packet
filters created by the network in that TFT, or no own packet filters.
The MS supporting S1 mode shall not modify the QoS of the first PDP
context that was established within the PDN connection. The MS not
supporting S1 mode should not modify the QoS of the first PDP context
that was established within the PDN connection (see
3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

To indicate a change of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDN connection,
the MS shall include the protocol configuration options IE in the MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message and set the 3GPP PS data off UE status only
if the network included the 3GPP PS data off support indication for the
PDN connection established by the PDP context activation procedure. The
MS behaves as described in subclause 4.7.1.10.

When the PDP context modification procedure is used to indicate a change
of 3GPP PS data off UE status for a PDN connection (see
subclause 4.7.1.10), the UE shall initiate the PDP context modification
procedure even if the timer T3396 or the back-off timer is running or is
deactivated.

The PDP context modification procedure may also be invoked by the MS, in
order to upgrade the maximum bit rate and to trigger the
re-establishment of the radio access bearer for an activated PDP context
which is preserved in the MS with maximum bit rate values of 0kbit/s for
both uplink and downlink (see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

NOTE 1: As described in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\], the MS only preserves PDP
contexts with a TFT including packet filter(s) set by the MS.

If

\- the PDP Context Modification request is accepted by the network but
the radio access bearer is not established; or

\- the PDP Context Modification request is rejected with cause
\"insufficient resources\" (see subclause 6.1.3.3.3),

then the MS is not required to start a new PDP Context Modification
procedure or to start a Service Request procedure in order to trigger
the re-establishment of the radio access bearer.

If there is a PDN connection for emergency bearer services established,
the MS shall not request a modification of bearer resources for this PDN
connection.

The network requested PDP context modification procedure may also be
used to update the PDP address when external PDP address allocation is
performed, in which case the MS receives the PDP address in the MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST (Network to MS direction) message.

NOTE 2: The procedure may be initiated by the network due to an
inter-SGSN Routing Area Updating when a PDP context is active.

The network requested PDP context modification procedure may also be
used to update the WLAN offload indication, in which case the MS
receives the updated WLAN offload indication in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST (Network to MS direction) message.

##### 6.1.3.3.1 Network initiated PDP Context Modification

In order to initiate the procedure, the network sends the MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message to the MS and starts timer T3386. The message
shall contain the new QoS and the radio priority level and LLC SAPI that
shall be used by the MS in A/Gb mode at the lower layers for the
transmission of data related to the PDP context. The MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message may also contain packet filters in the TFT information
element. If the selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and the TFT
information element is included in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message, the network shall include packet filter(s), or if no packet
filters are proposed to be either added, replaced or deleted, it shall
set TFT operation code to \"No TFT operation\" and include packet filter
identifier(s) in the Packet filter identifier parameter in the
parameters list to indicate which packet filter(s) in the TFT is
associated with the QoS change. If the TFT information element is
included in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message and packet filter(s)
is proposed to be added, the network shall allocate packet filter
identifier(s) for all packet filters to be added to the TFT. The network
shall allocate packet filter identifier value s which are currently not
allocated to any existing packet filter of the same TFT.

The network informs the MS about the Bearer Control Mode to be applied
for all active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP Address and APN by
including the selected Bearer Control Mode parameter in the protocol
configuration options information element. This information is either
explicitly given in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message or implicitly
given by not being present. The MS shall act according to the presence
of the protocol configuration options information element and the value
of the selected Bearer Control Mode parameter in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message:

\- if the protocol configuration options information element is not
present, the MS shall apply Bearer Control Mode \'MS only\' for all
active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP Address and APN.

\- if the selected Bearer Control Mode parameter is not present in the
protocol configuration options information element, the MS shall apply
Bearer Control Mode \'MS only\' for all active PDP contexts sharing the
same PDP Address and APN.

\- if the selected Bearer Control Mode parameter is present in the
protocol configuration options information element, the MS shall apply
Bearer Control Mode according to the value of this parameter for all
active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP Address and APN.

If a WLAN offload indication information element is included in the
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the MS shall replace stored WLAN
offload acceptability values for this PDN connection with the newly
received offload indications and use the UTRAN offload acceptability
value to determine whether this PDN connection is offloadable to WLAN or
not.

Upon receipt of the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, if the MS sent
an APN for the establishment of the PDN connection, the MS shall stop
the timer T3396 if it is running for the APN sent by the MS.If the MS
did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN connection and the
request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS shall stop the
timer T3396 associated with no APN if it is running. If the MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message was received for an emergency PDN connection,
the MS shall not stop the timer T3396 associated with no APN if it is
running. For any case, the MS shall then reply with the MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT ACCEPT message, if the MS accepts the new QoS and the indicated
LLC SAPI.

The network shall upon receipt of the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message
stop timer T3386.

In A/Gb mode, the network shall establish, reconfigure or continue using
the logical link with the new QoS for the LLC SAPI indicated in the
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message.

In Iu mode, if the Radio Access Bearer supporting the PDP context is
active, then the network shall reconfigure and continue using the Radio
Access Bearer with the new QoS indicated in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message; if the PDP context is preserved, then the network may
re-establish a Radio Access Bearer with the new QoS indicated in the
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message.

##### 6.1.3.3.2 MS initiated PDP Context Modification accepted by the network

In order to initiate the procedure, the MS sends the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message to the network, enters the state PDP-MODIFY-PENDING and
starts timer T3381. The message may contain the requested new QoS and/or
the TFT and the requested LLC SAPI (used in A/Gb mode). If the selected
Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and the MS wants to modify the QoS, it
shall include a TFT with packet filter(s), or if no packet filters are
proposed to be either added, replaced or deleted, it shall set TFT
operation code to \"No TFT operation\" and include packet filter
identifier(s) in the Packet filter identifier parameter in the
parameters list to indicate which packet filter(s) in the TFT is
associated with the QoS change. If the TFT information element is
included in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message and packet filters
are proposed to be added, the MS shall allocate packet filter
identifier(s) for all packet filters to be added to the TFT. The MS
shall allocate packet filter identifier value s which are currently not
allocated to any existing packet filter of the TFT. If a PDP context is
associated with a TFT containing packet filters established by both the
MS and the network, the only parameters in the QoS profile of that PDP
context the MS is allowed to modify are the bitrate parameters.

Upon receipt of the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the network may
reply with the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message in order to accept the
context modification. The reply message may contain the negotiated QoS
and the radio priority level based on the new QoS profile and the
negotiated LLC SAPI that shall be used in A/Gb mode by the logical link.

Upon receipt of the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the MS shall stop
the timer T3381. If the offered QoS parameters received from the network
differs from the QoS requested by the MS, the MS shall either accept the
negotiated QoS or initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure.

If a modification of QoS is requested by the MS, which the network can
not accept, being unable to provide the requested QoS, it should
maintain the QoS negotiated as previously negotiated or propose a new
QoS. That means that the network should not reject the MS initiated PDP
context modification request due to the unavailability of the QoS. If
the MS requested a value for a QoS parameter that is not within the
range specified by 3GPP TS 23.107\[81\], the network should negotiate
the parameter to a value that lies within the specified range.

##### 6.1.3.3.3 MS initiated PDP Context Modification not accepted by the network

###### 6.1.3.3.3.1 General

Upon receipt of a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, the network may
reject the MS initiated PDP context modification request by sending a
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message to the MS. The message shall contain a
cause code that typically indicates one of the following:

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 30: activation rejected by GGSN, Serving GW or PDN GW;

\# 32: Service option not supported;

\# 37: QoS not accepted;

\# 41: semantic error in the TFT operation;

\# 42: syntactical error in the TFT operation;

\# 44: semantic errors in packet filter(s);

\# 45: syntactical errors in packet filter(s);

\# 48: request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation;

\# 60: bearer handling not supported; or

\# 95 - 111: protocol errors.

If upon the reception of a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message the
network fails to re-establish the radio access bearer for a PDP context
whose maximum bit rate in uplink and downlink is set to 0kbit/s, the
network shall reply with a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message with cause
\#26 \"insufficient resources\".

If a TFT modification was requested and the requested TFT is not
available, then the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message shall be sent.

The network shall reply with a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message with
cause \#48 \"request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation\", if

\- the selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and the MS requests to
create a TFT for a PDP context that was established without TFT;

\- the selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and the MS requests to
upgrade the QoS of a PDP context without downlink packet filters, unless
uplink packet filters already exist for the PDP context and the MS
requests with the same MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message to create
downlink packet filters ;

\- the selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and the MS requests to
modify the QoS, but does not include a TFT with at least apacket filter
identifiers to indicate which packet filters in the TFT that is
associated with the QoS change; or

\- the selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' and the MS requests to
modify the QoS for a PDP context associated with a TFT containing packet
filters established by both the MS and the network and the MS tries to
modify other parameters than the bitrate parameters in the QoS profile
of that PDP context.

If a TFT modification was requested and the MS requests to modify or
delete packet filters which were added by the network, then the MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REJECT message shall be sent.

If the MS has requested to modify the QoS of a default PDP context, the
network shall reply with a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message with cause
code \"QoS not accepted\".

If the MS has requested to modify the PDP context of a LIPA PDN
connection or SIPTO at the local network PDN connection, then the
network shall reply with a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message with cause
code \"bearer handling not supported\".

The TFT in the request message is checked by the network for different
types of TFT IE errors as specified in subclause 6.1.3.3.4.

The network may include a Back-off timer value IE in the MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REJECT message.

The network shall not include the SM cause value \#26 \"insufficient
resources\" in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message due to APN based
congestion control being active.

If the Back-off timer value IE is included and the SM cause value is not
\#26 \"insufficient resources\", the network may include the Re-attempt
indicator IE to indicate whether the MS is allowed to attempt a bearer
resource modification procedure in the PLMN for the same APN in S1 mode,
and whether another attempt in A/Gb and Iu mode or in S1 mode is allowed
in an equivalent PLMN.

Upon receipt of a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message, the MS shall stop
timer T3381 and enter the state PDP-ACTIVE.

###### 6.1.3.3.3.2 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is \#26 and the Back-off timer value IE is
included, the MS shall ignore the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by
the network, if any, and take different actions depending on the timer
value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off timer value IE (if the MS
is configured for dual priority, exceptions are specified in
subclause 6.1.3.12; if the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in
selected PLMN, exceptions are specified in subclause 6.1.3.11):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if it is
running. The MS shall then start timer T3396 with the value provided in
the Back-off timer value IE and not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message with exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3,
for the same APN until timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped. If
the MS did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN connection
and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS shall stop
timer T3396 associated with no APN, if it is running. The MS shall then
start timer T3396 with the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE
and not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST without an APN and
with request type different from \"emergency\", or another ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with
exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for a non-emergency
PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS, until timer
T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped. The MS shall not stop timer
T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception
of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN until the MS
is switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives REQUEST
PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION, REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN or a DEACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM cause \#39 \"reactivation
requested\" for a PDP context which was activated by the MS for the same
APN from the network. If the MS did not send an APN for the
establishment of the PDN connection and the request type was different
from \"emergency\", the MS shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST without an APN and with request type different from
\"emergency\", or another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST with exception of those identified in
subclause 6.1.3.3, for a non-emergency PDN connection established
without APN sent by the MS, until the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM
is removed or the MS receives any of the following messages: a REQUEST
PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION without an APN, a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
ACTIVATION or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for a non-emergency PDN
connection established without an APN sent by the MS, or a DEACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM cause \#39 \"reactivation
requested\" for a PDP context which was activated by the MS for a
non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS.
The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system
change; or

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS:

\- shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if
running, and may send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for
the same APN; and

\- if the MS did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN
connection and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with no APN, if running, and may send
an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without an APN, or another
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for a non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN
sent by the MS.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, the MS may send an
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN.

If the timer T3396 is running when the MS enters state GMM-DEREGISTERED,
the MS remains switched on, and the SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same,
then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or it is stopped.

If the MS is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, and if the
SIM/USIM in the MS remains the same when the MS is switched on, the MS
behaves as follows:

\- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let
t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the
MS is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1; and

\- if prior to switch off, timer T3396 was running because an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message containing the
low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" was rejected with a timer value for timer T3396, and if timer
T3396 is restarted at switch on, then the MS configured for dual
priority shall handle session management requests as indicated in
subclause 6.1.3.12.

###### 6.1.3.3.3.3 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause other than SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is not \#26 \"insufficient resources\" and the
Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS takes different actions
depending on the timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE (if
the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN,
exceptions are specified in subclause 6.1.3.13):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off
timer value IE for the PDP context modification procedure and PLMN and
APN combination and not send another MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
with exception of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, in the PLMN for
the same APN until the back-off timer expires, the MS is switched off or
the SIM/USIM is removed;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception
of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, in the PLMN for the same APN
until the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed; or

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS may
send an MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same APN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the MS shall ignore
the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

i\) Additionally, if the SM cause value is \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
shall proceed as follows:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause, using the configured SM\_RetryWaitTime value as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, as back-off timer value; and

\- otherwise, if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that
is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM\_RetryWaitTime value is not
configured, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause, using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer.

ii\) For SM cause values different from \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
behaviour regarding the start of a back-off timer is unspecified.

The MS shall not stop any back-off timer upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change. If the network indicates that a back-off timer for
the PDP context modification procedure and PLMN and APN combination is
deactivated, then it remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change.

NOTE 1: This means the back-off timer can still be running or be
deactivated for the given SM procedure and PLMN and APN combination when
the MS returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back
from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode. Thus the MS can still be prevented from
sending another MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception of
those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, in the PLMN for the same APN.

If the back-off timer is started upon receipt of a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message (i.e. the timer value was provided by the network, a
configured value is available or the default value is used as explained
above) or the back-off timer is deactivated, the MS behaves as follows:

i\) after a PLMN change the MS may send a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for the same APN in the new PLMN, if the back-off timer is not
running and is not deactivated for the PDP context modification
procedure and the combination of new PLMN and APN;

Furthermore as an implementation option, for the SM cause values \#32
\"service option not supported\" or \#33 \"requested service option not
subscribed\", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE,
the MS may decide not to automatically send another MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message for the same APN, if the MS registered to a new PLMN
which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

ii\) if the network does not include the Re-attempt indicator IE to
indicate whether re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, or the MS ignores the
Re-attempt indicator IE, e.g. because the Back-off timer value IE is not
included, then:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall apply the configured SM\_RetryAtRATChange
value as specified in 3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~
as specified in 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, to determine
whether the MS may attempt a bearer resource modification procedure for
the same PLMN and APN combination in S1 mode; and

\- if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within
the EHPLMN list, or if the NAS configuration MO as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] is not available and the value for inter-system
change is not configured in the USIM file NAS~CONFIG~, then the MS
behaviour regarding a bearer resource modification procedure for the
same PLMN and APN combination in S1 mode is unspecified; and

iii\) if the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE indicating that
re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then depending on the
timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE, for each
combination of a PLMN from the equivalent PLMN list and the APN the MS
shall start a back-off timer for the PDP context modification procedure
with the value provided by the network, or deactivate the respective
back-off timer as follows:

\- If the Re-attempt indicator IE additionally indicates that re-attempt
in S1 mode is allowed, the MS shall start or deactivate the back-off
timer for A/Gb and Iu mode only; and

\- otherwise the MS shall start or deactivate the back-off timer for
A/Gb, Iu, and S1 mode.

If the back-off timer for a PLMN and APN combination was started or
deactivated in S1 mode upon receipt of a BEARER RESOURCE MODIFICATION
REJECT message (see 3GPP TS 24.301 \[120\]) and the network indicated
that re-attempt in A/Gb or Iu mode is allowed, then this back-off timer
does not prevent the MS from sending a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message in this PLMN for the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode. If the network
indicated that re-attempt in A/Gb or Iu mode is not allowed, the MS
shall not send any MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message in this PLMN for
the same APN in A/Gb or Iu mode until the timer expires, the MS is
switched off or the USIM is removed.

NOTE 2: The back-off timer is used to describe a logical model of the
required MS behaviour. This model does not imply any specific
implementation, e.g. as a timer or timestamp.

NOTE 3: Reference to back-off timer in this section can either refer to
use of timer T3396 or to use of a different packet system specific timer
within the MS. Whether the MS uses T3396 as a back-off timer or it uses
different packet system specific timers as back-off timers is left up to
MS implementation. This back-off timer is stopped when the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed.

##### 6.1.3.3.3a Network initiated PDP Context Modification not accepted by the MS

Upon receipt of a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, if the MS does not
accept the new QoS due to resource reasons or the indicated LLC SAPI,
the MS shall initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure for the PDP
context - the reject cause IE value of the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message shall indicate \"QoS not accepted\".

The MS may reject the network initiated PDP context modification request
by sending a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message to the network. The
message shall contain a cause code that typically indicates one of the
following:

\# 41: semantic error in the TFT operation;

\# 42: syntactical error in the TFT operation;

\# 44: semantic errors in packet filter(s);

\# 45: syntactical errors in packet filter(s);

\# 48: request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation; or

\# 95 - 111: protocol errors.

The MS shall reply with a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message with cause
\"request rejected, Bearer Control Mode violation\", if the selected
Bearer Control Mode is \'MS only\' and the network requests to modify or
delete a TFT

If a TFT modification was requested and the network requests to modify
or delete packet filters which were added by the MS, then the MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REJECT message shall be sent.

The TFT in the request message is checked by the MS for different types
of TFT IE errors as specified in subclause 6.1.3.3.4.

Upon receipt of a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message, the network shall
stop timer T3386 and enter the state PDP-ACTIVE.

##### 6.1.3.3.4 Abnormal cases

a\) Expiry of timers

On the network side:

On the first expiry of timer T3386, the network shall resend the MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message reset and restart timer T3386. This
retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer
T3386, the network may continue to use the previously negotiated QoS and
TFT, or it may initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure.

In the MS:

On the first expiry of timer T3381, the MS shall resend the MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message reset and restart timer T3381. This
retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer
T3381, the MS may continue to use the previously negotiated QoS and TFT,
or it may initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure.

b\) Collision of MS and Network initiated PDP Context Modification
Procedures

A collision of a MS and network initiated PDP context modification
procedures is identified by the MS if a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message is received from the network after the MS has sent a MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message itself, and both messages contain the same TI
and the MS has not yet received a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message from
the network.

A collision is detected by the network in case a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message is received from the MS with the same TI as the MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message sent to the MS.

In the case of such a collision, the network initiated PDP context
modification shall take precedence over the MS initiated PDP context
modification. The MS shall terminate internally the MS initiated PDP
context modification procedure, enter the state PDP-Active and proceed
with the network initiated PDP context modification procedure by sending
a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message. The network shall ignore the MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message received in the state PDP-MODIFY-PENDING.
The network shall proceed with the network initiated PDP context
modification procedure as if no MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message was
received from the MS.

c\) Collision of MS initiated PDP Context Modification Procedures and
Network initiated Deactivate PDP Context Request Procedures

A collision of a MS initiated PDP context modification procedures and a
network initiated PDP context deactivation procedures is identified by
the MS if a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message is received from the
network after the MS has sent a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, and
the MS has not yet received a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message from the
network.

In the case of such a collision, the network initiated PDP context
deactivation shall take precedence over the MS initiated PDP context
modification. The MS shall terminate internally the MS initiated PDP
context modification procedure, and proceed with the network initiated
PDP context deactivation procedure by sending a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
ACCEPT, enter the state PDP-INACTIVE. The network shall ignore the
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message received in the state
PDP-INACTIVE-PENDING. The network shall proceed with the network
initiated PDP context deactivation procedure as if no MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message was received from the MS.

d\) MS initiated PDP context modification procedure for a PDN connection
established for emergency bearer services.

The network shall reply with a MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REJECT message with a
cause code indicating \"activation rejected by GGSN, Serving GW or PDN
GW\".

The TFT in the MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message is checked for
different types of TFT IE errors as follows:

a\) Semantic errors in TFT operations:

1\) When the TFT operation is \"Create a new TFT\" and there is already
an existing TFT for the PDP context.

2\) When the TFT operation is an operation other than \"Create a new
TFT\" and there is no TFT for the PDP context.

3\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete existing TFT\" and the TFT
includes packet filters created by the receiver of the request.

4\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete existing TFT\" and there is
already another PDP context with the same PDP address and APN without a
TFT.

5\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete existing TFT\" and the PDP context
is not the default PDP context.

6\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete packet filters from existing TFT\"
or \"Replace packet filters in existing TFT\" and at least one of the
packet filters to be deleted or replaced was created by the receiver of
the request.

7\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete packet filters from existing TFT\"
and this operation would render the TFT empty.

In the above cases the network shall perform the following actions:

In case 1) the network shall further process the new activation request
and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old TFT.

In case 2) the network shall:

\- further process the new request and, if no error according to list
items b), c), and d) was detected, consider the TFT as successfully
deleted, if the TFT operation is \"Delete existing TFT\" or \"Delete
packet filters from existing TFT\"; and

\- process the new request as an activation request, if the TFT
operation is \"Add packet filters in existing TFT\" or \"Replace packet
filters in existing TFT\".

In case 3) the network shall reject the modification request with cause
\"semantic error in the TFT operation\".

In case 4) the network shall either:

\- reject the modification request with cause \"semantic error in the
TFT operation\"; or

\- optionally, if the BCM is \"MS only\" and the packet filters in the
TFT do not have any explicit direction information, i.e. the packet
filter direction parameter is set to \"00\", process the new deletion
request and, after successful deletion of the TFT, deactivate the old
PDP context with the same PDP address and APN without a TFT by explicit
peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the network.

\- In case 5) the network shall either:

\- reject the modification request with cause \"semantic error in the
TFT operation\"; or

\- optionally, if the BCM is \"MS only\" and the packet filters in the
TFT do not have any explicit direction information, i.e. the packet
filter direction parameter is set to \"00\", process the new deletion
request.

In case 6) the network shall reject the modification request with cause
\"semantic error in the TFT operation\".

In case 7) the network shall:

i\) if the PDP context is the default PDP context, further process the
new request and, if no error according to list items b), c), and d) was
detected, delete the existing TFT. After successful deletion of the TFT,
if there was already another PDP context with the same PDP address and
APN without a TFT, the network shall deactivate this old PDP context
without a TFT by explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the
network; and

ii\) if the PDP context is not the default PDP context, further process
the new request and, if no error according to list items b), c), and d)
was detected, delete the existing TFT. After successful deletion of the
TFT, the network shall deactivate the modified PDP context by explicit
peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the network. The network need
not respond with a Modify PDP Context Accept message.

In the above cases the MS shall perform the following actions:

In case 1) the MS shall further process the new activation request and,
if it was processed successfully, delete the old TFT.

In case 2) the MS shall:

\- further process the new request and, if no error according to list
items b), c), and d) was detected, consider the TFT as successfully
deleted, if the TFT operation is \"Delete existing TFT\" or \"Delete
packet filters from existing TFT\"; and

\- process the new request as an activation request, if the TFT
operation is \"Add packet filters in existing TFT\" or \"Replace packet
filters in existing TFT\".

In case 3) the MS shall reject the modification request with cause
\"semantic error in the TFT operation\".

In case 4) the MS shall either:

A\) reject the modification request with cause \"semantic error in the
TFT operation\"; or

B\) optionally, to support networks compliant with earlier versions of
the protocol, process the new deletion request and, after successful
deletion of the TFT, deactivate the old PDP context with the same PDP
address and APN without a TFT by explicit peer-to-peer signalling
between the MS and the network.

NOTE 1: This case is not expected to occur for a network implementing
this version of the protocol, because at least one of the two PDP
contexts without TFT will be a non-default PDP context. But for Bearer
Control Mode \'MS/NW\' such a network does not support an initial
configuration where the old PDP context without TFT is a non-default PDP
context, and the network will not attempt to delete the TFT of a
non-default PDP context.

If during a previous inter-system change from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode
the default PDP context linked to the PDP context to be modified was
mapped from an EPS bearer context, the MS shall follow option A.

In case 5) the MS shall either:

A\) reject the modification request with cause \"semantic error in the
TFT operation\"; or

B\) optionally, to support networks compliant with earlier versions of
the protocol, process the new deletion request.

NOTE 2: A network implementing this version of the protocol will not
attempt to delete the TFT of a non-default PDP context.

If during a previous inter-system change from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode
the default PDP context linked to the PDP context to be modified was
mapped from an EPS bearer context, the MS shall follow option A.

In case 6) the MS shall reject the modification request with cause
\"semantic error in the TFT operation\".

In case 7) the MS shall:

i\) if the PDP context is the default PDP context, further process the
new request and, if no error according to list items b), c), and d) was
detected, delete the existing TFT. After successful deletion of the TFT,
if there was already another PDP context with the same PDP address and
APN without a TFT, the MS shall deactivate this old PDP context without
a TFT by explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the
network; and

ii\) if the PDP context is not the default PDP context, either

\- further process the new request and, if no error according to list
items b), c), and d) was detected, delete the existing TFT. After
successful deletion of the TFT, the MS shall deactivate the modified PDP
context by explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the
network. The MS need not send a Modify PDP Context Accept message; or

\- reject the modification request with cause \"semantic error in the
TFT operation\".

b\) Syntactical errors in TFT operations:

1\) When the TFT operation is an operation other than \"Delete existing
TFT\" or \"No TFT operation\" and the packet filter list in the TFT IE
is empty.

2\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete existing TFT\" or \"No TFT
operation\" with a non-empty packet filter list in the TFT IE.

3\) When the TFT operation is \"Replace packet filters in existing TFT\"
and the packet filter to be replaced does not exist in the original TFT.

4\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete packet filters from existing TFT\"
and the packet filter to be deleted does not exist in the original TFT.

5\) When the TFT operation is \"Delete packet filters from existing TFT\"
with a packet filter list also including packet filters in addition to
the packet filter identifiers.

6\) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of the
TFT IE, such as a mismatch between the number of packet filters
subfield, and the number of packet filters in the packet filter list.

7\) When the TFT operation is \"No TFT operation\" with an empty
parameters list.

In case 3) the network shall not diagnose an error, further process the
replace request and, if no error according to list items c) and d) was
detected, include the packet filters received to the existing TFT.

In case 4) the network shall not diagnose an error, further process the
deletion request and, if no error according to list items c) and d) was
detected, consider the respective packet filter as successfully deleted.

Otherwise the network shall reject the modification request with cause
\"syntactical error in the TFT operation\".

In case 3) the MS shall not diagnose an error, further process the
replace request and, if no error according to list items c) and d) was
detected, include the packet filters received to the existing TFT.

In case 4) the MS shall not diagnose an error, further process the
deletion request and, if no error according to list items c) and d) was
detected, consider the respective packet filter as successfully deleted.

Otherwise the MS shall reject the modification request with cause
\"syntactical error in the TFT operation\".

c\) Semantic errors in packet filters:

1\) When a packet filter consists of conflicting packet filter components
which would render the packet filter ineffective, i.e. no IP packet will
ever fit this packet filter. How the receiver determines a semantic
error in a packet filter is outside the scope of the present document.

2\) When the resulting TFT, which is not assigned to the default PDP
context, does not contain any packet filter applicable for the uplink
direction.

NOTE 3: When BCM is \'MS only\', the MS is allowed to include a TFT with
packet filters without any explicit direction information, i.e. with
value \"00\", and such packet filters are applicable for both uplink and
downlink directions.

The network shall reject the modification request with cause \"semantic
errors in packet filter(s)\".

The MS shall reject the modification request with cause \"semantic
errors in packet filter(s)\".

d\) Syntactical errors in packet filters:

1\) When the TFT operation is \"Create a new TFT\" or \"Add packet
filters to existing TFT\" and two or more packet filters in the
resultant TFT would have identical packet filter identifiers.

2\) When the TFT operation is \"Create a new TFT\" or \"Add packet
filters to existing TFT\" or \"Replace packet filters in existing TFT\"
and two or more packet filters in all TFTs associated with this PDP
address and APN would have identical packet filter precedence values.

3\) When there are other types of syntactical errors in the coding of
packet filters, such as the use of a reserved value for a packet filter
component identifier.

In case 1), if two or more packet filters with identical packet filter
identifiers are contained in the new request, the network shall reject
the modification request with cause \"syntactical errors in packet
filter(s)\". Otherwise, the network shall not diagnose an error, further
process the new request and, if it was processed successfully, delete
the old packet filters which have the identical packet filter
identifiers.

In case 2) the network shall not diagnose an error, further process the
new request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old packet
filters which have identical filter precedence values. Furthermore, by
means of explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the MS and the
network, the network shall deactivate the PDP context(s) for which it
has deleted the packet filters.

Otherwise the network shall reject the modification request with cause
\"syntactical errors in packet filter(s)\".

In case 1), if two or more packet filters with identical packet filter
identifiers are contained in the new request, the MS shall reject the
modification request with cause \"syntactical errors in packet
filter(s)\". Otherwise, the MS shall not diagnose an error, further
process the new request and, if it was processed successfully, delete
the old packet filters which have the identical packet filter
identifiers.

In case 2) the MS shall not diagnose an error, further process the new
request and, if it was processed successfully, delete the old packet
filters which have identical filter precedence values. Furthermore, the
MS shall deactivate the PDP context(s) for which it has deleted the
packet filters by means of explicit peer-to-peer signalling between the
MS and the network,.

Otherwise, the MS shall reject the modification request with cause
\"syntactical errors in packet filter(s)\".

![](media/image52.emf){width="5.597222222222222in" height="1.5in"}

Figure 6.6/3GPP TS 24.008: Network initiated PDP context modification
procedure

Figure 6.7/3GPP TS 24.008: MS initiated PDP context modification
procedure

#### 6.1.3.4 PDP context deactivation procedure

The purpose of this procedure is to deactivate an existing PDP context
between the MS and the network. The PDP context deactivation may be
initiated by the MS or by the network. The *tear down indicator*
information element may be included in the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message in order to indicate whether only the PDP context
associated with this specific TI or all active PDP contexts sharing the
same PDP address and APN as the PDP context associated with this
specific TI shall be deactivated. If the tear down is requested, all
other active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP address and APN as the
PDP context associated with this specific TI shall be deactivated
locally without peer-to-peer signalling. In this case, the network
should not include WLAN offload indication in the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message, and if the UE receives the WLAN offload indication, the
UE shall ignore the indication. If the *tear down indicator* information
element is not included in the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message,
only the PDP context associated with this specific TI shall be
deactivated. For an exception when the PDP context is a default PDP
context and there are other active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP
address and APN, see subclause 6.1.3.4.3.

An MS supporting S1 mode shall always include the tear down indicator
when deactivating the default PDP context. An MS not supporting S1 mode
should apply the same behavior (see 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]).

Local deactivation of a NBIFOM multi-access PDN connection can be
triggered by an NBIFOM procedure (see 3GPP TS 24.161 \[158\]). If such a
trigger is received then the associated PDP contexts mentioned in this
specification shall be deactivated locally without peer-to-peer
signalling.

After successful PDP context deactivation, the associated NSAPI and TI
values are released and can be reassigned to another PDP context.

If one or more MBMS contexts are linked to a PDP context that has been
deactivated, the MS shall deactivate all those MBMS contexts locally
(without peer to peer signalling between the MS and the network).

The MS is allowed to initiate the PDP context deactivation procedure
even if the timer T3396 is running.

##### 6.1.3.4.1 PDP context deactivation initiated by the MS

In order to deactivate a PDP context, the MS sends a DEACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message to the network, enters the state
PDP-INACTIVE-PENDING and starts timer T3390. The message contains the
transaction identifier (TI) in use for the PDP context to be deactivated
and a cause code that typically indicates one of the following causes:

\# 25: LLC or SNDCP failure (A/Gb mode only);

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 36: regular deactivation; or

\# 37: QoS not accepted.

The network shall reply with the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message.
Upon receipt of the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message, the MS shall
stop timer T3390.

In A/Gb mode, both the MS and the network shall initiate local release
of the logical link if it is not used by another PDP context.

In Iu mode, the network shall initiate the release of Radio Access
Bearer associated with this PDP context.

If the selected Bearer Control Mode is \'MS/NW\' the MS should not
deactivate a PDP context, if it is the only PDP context without TFT
within a group of active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP address and
APN.

NOTE 1: A configuration with more than one PDP context without TFT
within a group of active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP address and
APN can occur during a network initiated PDP context modification due to
asynchronous TFT states in the MS and in the network (see e.g.
subclause 6.1.3.3.4 bullet a.3 in the description of the TFT checks).

NOTE 2: If the MS deactivates the last remaining PDP context without TFT
within a group of active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP address and
APN, a network implementing this version of the protocol will deactivate
all other active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP address and APN by
explicit peer-to-peer signalling; a network compliant with earlier
versions of the protocol can initiate the re-establishment of this PDP
context using the network requested secondary PDP context activation
procedure.

##### 6.1.3.4.2 PDP context deactivation initiated by the network

In order to deactivate a PDP context, the network sends a DEACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message to the MS and starts timer T3395. The message
contains the transaction identifier in use for the PDP context to be
deactivated and a cause code that typically indicates one of the
following causes:

\# 8: Operator Determined Barring;

\# 25: LLC or SNDCP failure (A/Gb mode only);

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 36: regular deactivation;

\# 38: network failure;

\# 39: reactivation requested.

\#112: APN restriction value incompatible with active PDP context; or

\#113: Multiple accesses to a PDN connection not allowed.

The MS shall, upon receipt of this message, reply with a DEACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT ACCEPT message. Upon receipt of the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
ACCEPT message, the network shall stop the timer T3395.

If the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message includes the cause \#39
\"reactivation requested\", the PDP context was activated by the MS, and
the MS sent an APN for the establishment of the PDN connection, the MS
shall stop timer T3396 if it is running for the APN sent by the MS. The
MS should then re-activate the PDP context. If the MS did not send an
APN for the establishment of the PDN connection and the request type was
different from \"emergency\", the MS shall stop the timer T3396
associated with no APN if it is running, and should re-activate the PDP
context without including an APN. Additionally, the MS should
re-activate the PDP contexts that were originally activated by the MS
and released by the network as a result of this PDP context deactivation
procedure. If the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message was received
for an emergency PDN connection, the MS shall not stop the timer T3396
associated with no APN if it is running. The MS should then re-initiate
the PDP context activation procedure for the emergency PDN connection.

NOTE: User interaction is necessary in some cases when the MS cannot
re-activate the PDP context(s) automatically.

If a detach is requested by the HLR for an MS that has PDP contexts for
emergency services, the SGSN shall send a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message to the MS for all the PDP contexts that are not PDP contexts for
emergency services.

If the network operates in network operation mode I, ISR is activated
and the MS has indicated support of EMM combined procedures in MS
network capability, when the SGSN receives the request from the Serving
GW for deactivating the last remaining PDP context, then the SGSN shall
perform a detach procedure for non-GPRS services only as described in
subclause 4.7.4.2.

In A/Gb mode, both the MS and the network shall initiate local release
of the logical link if it is not used by another PDP context.

In Iu mode, the network shall initiate the release of Radio Access
Bearer associated with this PDP context.

If the SM cause value is \#26 \"insufficient resources\", the network
may include a value for timer T3396 in the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message.

If the SM cause value is \#26 \"insufficient resources\" and T3396 value
IE is included:

\- the MS shall take different actions depending on the timer value
received for timer T3396 (if the MS is configured for dual priority,
exceptions are specified in subclause 6.1.3.12; if the MS is an MS
configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN, exceptions are specified
in subclause 6.1.3.11):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall stop the timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if it
is running. The MS shall start timer T3396 with received value and not
send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception of
those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN until timer
T3396 expires or the timer T3396 is stopped. If the MS did not send an
APN for the establishment of the PDN connection and the request type was
different from \"emergency\", the MS shall stop timer T3396 associated
with no APN, if it is running. The MS shall then start timer T3396 with
the value provided in the Back-off timer value IE and not send another
ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST without an APN and with request type
different from \"emergency\", or another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception of those
identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for a non-emergency PDN connection
established without an APN sent by the MS, until timer T3396 expires or
timer T3396 is stopped. The MS shall not stop timer T3396 upon a PLMN
change or inter-system change;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception
of those identified in subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN until the MS
is switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives a REQUEST
PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION, REQUEST SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message with exception of those identified in
subclause 6.1.3.3, for the same APN from the network or a DEACTIVATE PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM cause \#39 \"reactivation
requested\" for a PDP context which was activated by the MS for the same
APN from the network. If the MS did not send an APN for the
establishment of the PDN connection and the request type was different
from \"emergency\", the MS shall not send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST without an APN and with request type different from
\"emergency\", or another ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or
MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST with exception of those identified in
subclause 6.1.3.3, for a non-emergency PDN connection established
without an APN sent by the MS, until the MS is switched off or the
SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives any of the following messages: a
REQUEST PDP CONTEXT ACTIVATION without an APN, a REQUEST SECONDARY PDP
CONTEXT ACTIVATION or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for a
non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN sent by the MS,
or a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message including SM cause \#39
\"reactivation requested\" for a PDP context which was activated by the
MS for a non-emergency PDN connection established without APN sent by
the MS. The timer T3396 remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change; and

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS:

\- shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if
running, and may send another ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE
SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message for
the same APN; and

\- if the MS did not send an APN for the establishment of the PDN
connection and the request type was different from \"emergency\", the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with no APN, if running, and may send
an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without an APN, or another
ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message for a non-emergency PDN connection established without an APN
sent by the MS.

\- If the timer T3396 is running when the MS enters state
GMM-DEREGISTERED, the MS remains switched on, and the SIM/USIM in the MS
remains the same, then timer T3396 is kept running until it expires or
it is stopped.

\- if the MS is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, the MS
shall behave as follows when the MS is switched on and the SIM/USIM in
the MS remains the same:

\- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let
t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the
MS is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1; and

\- if prior to switch off, timer T3396 was running because an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message containing the low priority indicator set to
\"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\" was rejected with
timer T3396, and if timer T3396 is restarted at switch on, then the MS
configured for dual priority shall handle session management requests as
indicated in subclause 6.1.3.12.

If the T3396 value IE is not included, the MS shall proceed with
deactivation procedure and then send DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT
message.

##### 6.1.3.4.3 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Expiry of timers

In the mobile station:

On the first expiry of timer T3390, the MS shall resent the message
DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST and shall reset and restart the timer
T3390. This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth
expiry of timer T3390, the MS shall release all resources allocated and
shall erase the PDP context related data.

On the network side:

On the first expiry of timer T3395, the network shall resent the message
DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST and shall reset and restart timer T3395.
This retransmission is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of
timer T3395, the network shall erase the PDP context related data for
that MS.

b\) Collision of MS and network initiated PDP context deactivation
requests

If the MS and the network initiated PDP context deactivation requests
collide, the MS and the network shall each reply with the messages
DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT and shall stop timer T3390 and T3395,
respectively.

c\) Network initiated PDP context deactivation request without *tear down
indicator* information element for a default PDP context

If an MS supporting S1 mode receives a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message without *tear down indicator* information element, and the PDP
context associated with the specific TI is a default PDP context, the MS
shall deactivate the default PDP context as specified in
subclause 6.1.3.4.2. Additionally the MS shall deactivate all other
active PDP contexts sharing the same PDP address and APN as the default
PDP context locally without peer-to-peer signalling.

An MS not supporting S1 mode may apply the same behaviour.

![](media/image54.emf){width="5.597222222222222in"
height="1.7083333333333333in"}

Figure 6.8/3GPP TS 24.008: MS initiated PDP context deactivation
procedure

![](media/image55.emf){width="5.597222222222222in"
height="1.5972222222222223in"}

Figure 6.9/3GPP TS 24.008: Network initiated PDP context deactivation
procedure

#### 6.1.3.4a Void

#### 6.1.3.5 Void

#### 6.1.3.5a Notification procedure

##### 6.1.3.5a.1 General

The network can use the notification procedure to inform the MS about
events which are relevant for the upper layer which is using a PDP
context or has requested a session management procedure.

If the MS has indicated that it supports the notification procedure, the
network may initiate the procedure at any time while a PDP context is
activated or another session management procedure is ongoing.

##### 6.1.3.5a.2 Notification procedure initiation by the network

The network initiates the notification procedure by sending a
NOTIFICATION message to the MS (see example in
figure 6.9a/3GPP TS 24.008).

Figure 6.9a/3GPP TS 24.008: Notification procedure

##### 6.1.3.5a.3 Notification procedure in the MS

When the MS receives a NOTIFICATION message, the SM protocol entity in
the MS shall provide the notification indicator to the upper layer.

The notification indicator can have the following value:

\#1: SRVCC handover cancelled, IMS session re-establishment required.

#### 6.1.3.6 Receiving a SM STATUS message by a SM entity

If the SM entity of the MS receives an SM STATUS message the MS shall
take different actions depending on the received SM cause value:

\#81 Invalid transaction identifier value

The MS shall abort any ongoing SM procedure related to the received
transaction identifier value, stop any related timer, and deactivate the
corresponding PDP or MBMS context locally (without peer to peer
signalling between the MS and the network).

If one or more MBMS contexts are linked to a PDP context that has been
deactivated, the MS shall deactivate all those MBMS Contexts locally
(without peer to peer signalling between the MS and the network).

\#97 Message type non-existent or not implemented

The MS shall abort any ongoing SM procedure related to the received
transaction identifier value and stop any related timer.

If the SM entity of the MS receives a SM STATUS message with any other
SM cause value no state transition and no specific action shall be taken
as seen from the radio interface, i.e. local actions are possible.

If the SM entity of the network receives an SM STATUS message the
network shall take different actions depending on the received SM cause
value:

\#81 Invalid transaction identifier value

The network shall abort any ongoing SM procedure related to the received
transaction identifier value, stop any related timer, and deactivate the
corresponding PDP or MBMS context locally (without peer to peer
signalling between the MS and the network).

If one or more MBMS contexts are linked to a PDP context that has been
deactivated, the MS shall deactivate all those MBMS Contexts locally
(without peer to peer signalling between the MS and the network).

\#97 Message type non-existent or not implemented

The network shall abort any ongoing SM procedure related to the received
transaction identifier value and stop any related timer.

The actions to be taken in the network on receiving a SM STATUS message
with any other SM cause value are an implementation dependent option.

#### 6.1.3.7 Protocol configuration options

The MS and the GGSN may communicate parameters by means of the protocol
configuration options information element or extended protocol
configuration options information element when activating, modifying or
deactivating a PDP context. Such parameters can e.g. be used to convey
information from external protocols between the MS and the GGSN. An
overview of how the protocol configuration options information element
is used is specified in 3GPP TS 27.060 \[36a\].

The protocol configuration options information element and the extended
protocol configuration options information element is transparent to the
SGSN.

NOTE 1: The MS and the network negotiate support of the extended
protocol configuration options IE end-to-end for each PDN connection, as
the information element can only be used if it is supported also by the
GGSN/PDN GW.

If supported by the network and the MS end-to-end for a PDN connection,
protocol configuration options shall be exchanged via the extended
protocol configuration options IE. Otherwise the protocol configuration
options IE is used.

For the MS, the extended protocol configuration options is supported by
the network and the MS end-to-end for a PDN connection if the network
has indicated support of the extended protocol configuration options IE
in the last ATTACH ACCEPT or ROUTING AREA UPDATING ACCEPT message, and

\- the PDP Type requested for the default PDP context is non-IP; or

\- the network has included the extended protocol configuration options
IE in at least one session management message received by the MS for
this PDN connection.

For the SGSN, the extended protocol configuration options is supported
by the network and the MS end-to-end for a PDN connection if the MS has
indicated support of the extended protocol configuration options IE in
the last ATTACH REQUEST or ROUTING AREA UPDATING REQUEST message, and

\- the PDP Type requested for the default PDP context is non-IP; or

\- the SGSN has received the extended protocol configuration options IE
in at least one message sent by the GGSN or PDN GW towards the MS for
this PDN connection (for details see 3GPP TS 29.274 \[16D\]).

NOTE 2: For the GGSN or PDN GW, the extended protocol configuration
options is supported by the network and the MS end-to-end for a PDN
connection if:

\- the GGSN initiates a network requested PDP context activation with
offered PDP Type non-IP; or

\- the last support indication received from the SGSN or S-GW indicates
that extended protocol configuration options is supported for this PDN
connection (for details see 3GPP TS 29.274 \[16D\]).

#### 6.1.3.8 MBMS context activation

The purpose of this procedure is to establish an MBMS context in the MS
and in the network for a specific IP Multicast Address using a specific
NSAPI for MBMS user plane transmission. The MS shall only initiate the
MBMS context activation when requested by the network. However, the
trigger for the activation request by the network is initiated by the MS
at the application layer (see 3GPP TS 23.246 \[106\]).

##### 6.1.3.8.1 Successful MBMS context activation 

In order to request an MBMS context activation, the network sends a
REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION message to the MS, enters the state
MBMS-ACTIVE-PENDING and starts timer T3385. The message shall contain
the IP multicast address, the APN and the Linked NSAPI.

Upon receipt of a REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION message, the MS shall
validate the message by verifying the NSAPI given in the Linked NSAPI IE
to be one of the active PDP context(s), stop the timer T3396 if it is
running for the APN indicated in the message and send an ACTIVATE MBMS
CONTEXT REQUEST, enter state MBMS-ACTIVE-PENDING and start timer T3380.
The message shall contain an IP multicast address and an APN, which
shall be the same as the IP multicast address and the APN requested by
the network in the REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION message. Furthermore,
the MS shall include the Supported MBMS bearer capabilities, i.e. the
maximum downlink bit rate the MS can handle.

Upon receipt of the ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message, the network
shall stop timer T3385. If the network accepts the request, it shall
reply with an ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT ACCEPT message.

Upon receipt of the message ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT ACCEPT the MS shall
stop timer T3380 and shall enter the state MBMS-ACTIVE.

##### 6.1.3.8.2 Unsuccessful MBMS context activation requested by the MS

###### 6.1.3.8.2.1 General

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message the network may
reject the MS initiated MBMS context activation by sending an ACTIVATE
MBMS CONTEXT REJECT message to the MS. The sender of the message shall
include the same TI as included in the ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEX REQUEST and
an additional cause code that typically indicates one of the following
causes:

\# 8: Operator Determined Barring;

\# 24: MBMS bearer capabilities insufficient for the service;

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 27: missing or unknown APN;

\# 29: user authentication failed;

\# 30: activation rejected by GGSN, Serving GW or PDN GW;

\# 31: activation rejected, unspecified;

\# 32: service option not supported;

\# 33: requested service option not subscribed;

\# 34: service option temporarily out of order; or

\# 95 - \# 111: protocol errors.

The network may include a Back-off timer value IE in the ACTIVATE MBMS
CONTEXT REJECT message.

If the Back-off timer value IE is included and the SM cause value is
different from \#26 \"insufficient resources\", the network may include
the Re-attempt indicator IE to indicate whether the MS is allowed to
attempt an MBMS context activation procedure in an equivalent PLMN.

Upon receipt of an ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REJECT message, the MS shall
stop timer T3380 and enter/remain in state PDP-INACTIVE.

###### 6.1.3.8.2.2 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is \#26 \"insufficient resources\" and the
Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS shall ignore the Re-attempt
indicator IE provided by the network, if any, and take different actions
depending on the timer value received for timer T3396 in the Back-off
timer value IE (if the MS is configured for dual priority, exceptions
are specified in subclause 6.1.3.12):

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall stop timer T3396 associated with the corresponding APN, if it is
running. The MS shall then start timer T3396 with the value provided in
the Back-off timer value IE and shall not send another ACTIVATE MBMS
CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN that was sent by the MS until
timer T3396 expires or timer T3396 is stopped. The MS shall not stop
timer T3396 upon a PLMN change or inter-system change;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message for the
same APN that was sent by the MS, until the MS is switched off or the
SIM/USIM is removed or the MS receives REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION
message for the same APN from the network. The timer T3396 remains
deactivated upon a PLMN change or inter-system change; and

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS may
send another ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the MS may send
another ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN.

If the MS is switched off when the timer T3396 is running, the MS shall
behave as follows when the MS is switched on and the SIM/USIM in the MS
remains the same:

\- let t1 be the time remaining for T3396 timeout at switch off and let
t be the time elapsed between switch off and switch on. If t1 is greater
than t, then the timer shall be restarted with the value t1 -- t. If t1
is equal to or less than t, then the timer need not be restarted. If the
MS is not capable of determining t, then the MS shall restart the timer
with the value t1; and

\- if prior to switch off, timer T3396 was running because an ACTIVATE
PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, MODIFY PDP
CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message containing the
low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\" was rejected with timer T3396, and if timer T3396 is
restarted at switch on, then the MS configured for dual priority shall
handle session management requests as indicated in subclause 6.1.3.12.

###### 6.1.3.8.2.3 Handling of network rejection due to SM cause other than SM cause \#26

If the SM cause value is different from \#26 \"insufficient resources\",
and the Back-off timer value IE is included, the MS shall take different
actions depending on the timer value received in the Back-off timer
value IE:

i\) if the timer value indicates neither zero nor deactivated, the MS
shall start the back-off timer with the value provided in the Back-off
timer value IE for the MBMS context activation procedure and PLMN and
APN combination. The MS shall not send another ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT
REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same APN that was sent by the MS
until the back-off timer expires, the MS is switched off or the SIM/USIM
is removed;

ii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is deactivated, the MS
shall not send another ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN
for the same APN that was sent by the MS until the MS is switched off or
the SIM/USIM is removed; and

iii\) if the timer value indicates that this timer is zero, the MS may
send an ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for the same
APN.

If the Back-off timer value IE is not included, then the MS shall ignore
the Re-attempt indicator IE provided by the network, if any.

i\) Additionally, if the SM cause value is \#8 \"operator determined
barring\", \#27 \"missing or unknown APN\", \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
shall proceed as follows:

\- if the MS is registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that is within the
EHPLMN list, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause, using the configured SM\_RetryWaitTime value as specified in
3GPP TS 24.368 \[135\] or in USIM file NAS~CONFIG~ as specified in
3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\], if available, as back-off timer value; and

\- otherwise, if the MS is not registered in its HPLMN or in a PLMN that
is within the EHPLMN list, or if the SM\_RetryWaitTime value is not
configured, the MS shall behave as described above in the present
subclause using the default value of 12 minutes for the back-off timer.

ii\) For SM cause values different from \#8 \"operator determined
barring\", \#27 \"missing or unknown APN\", \#32 \"service option not
supported\", or \#33 \"requested service option not subscribed\", the MS
behaviour regarding the start of a back-off timer is unspecified.

The MS shall not stop any back-off timer upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change. If the network indicates that a back-off timer for
the MBMS context activation procedure and PLMN and APN combination is
deactivated, then it remains deactivated upon a PLMN change or
inter-system change.

NOTE 1: This means the back-off timer can still be running or be
deactivated for the given SM procedure and PLMN and APN combination when
the MS returns to the PLMN or when it performs inter-system change back
from S1 mode to A/Gb or Iu mode. Thus the MS can still be prevented from
sending another ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST message in the PLMN for
the same APN.

If the back-off timer is started upon receipt of an ACTIVATE MBMS
CONTEXT REJECT message (i.e. the timer value was provided by the
network, a configured value is available or the default value is used as
explained above) or the back-off timer is deactivated, the MS behaves as
follows:

i\) after a PLMN change the MS may send an ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST
message for the same APN in the new PLMN, if the back-off timer is not
running and is not deactivated for the MBMS context activation procedure
and the combination of new PLMN and APN;

Furthermore as an implementation option, for the SM cause values \#8
\"operator determined barring\", \#27 \"missing or unknown APN\", \#32
\"service option not supported\" or \#33 \"requested service option not
subscribed\", if the network does not include a Re-attempt indicator IE,
the MS may decide not to automatically send another ACTIVATE MBMS
CONTEXT REQUEST message for the same APN, if the MS registered to a new
PLMN which is in the list of equivalent PLMNs.

ii\) if the network includes the Re-attempt indicator IE, the MS shall
ignore any indication provided in the IE regarding whether re-attempt in
S1 mode is allowed. If the Re-attempt indicator IE indicates that
re-attempt in an equivalent PLMN is not allowed, then depending on the
timer value received in the Back-off timer value IE, for each
combination of a PLMN from the equivalent PLMN list and the APN the MS
shall start a back-off timer for the MBMS context activation procedure
with the value provided by the network, or deactivate the respective
back-off timer.

NOTE 2: The back-off timer is used to describe a logical model of the
required MS behaviour. This model does not imply any specific
implementation, e.g. as a timer or timestamp.

NOTE 3: Reference to back-off timer in this section can either refer to
use of timer T3396 or to use of a different packet system specific timer
within the MS. Whether the MS uses T3396 as a back-off timer or it uses
different packet system specific timers as back-off timers is left up to
MS implementation. This back-off timer is stopped when the MS is
switched off or the SIM/USIM is removed.

##### 6.1.3.8.3 Unsuccessful MBMS context activation requested by the network

Upon receipt of the REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION message, the MS may
reject the network requested MBMS context activation by sending the
REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION REJECT message to the network. The
sender of the message shall include the same TI as included in the
REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT ACTIVATION and an additional cause code that
typically indicates one of the following causes:

\# 26: insufficient resources;

\# 31: activation rejected, unspecified;

\# 40: feature not supported; or

\# 95 - \# 111: protocol errors.

The network shall stop timer T3385 and enter in state PDP-INACTIVE.

##### 6.1.3.8.4 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Expiry of timers in the mobile station: On the first expiry of the
timer T3380, the MS shall resend the ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST and
shall reset and restart timer T3380. This retransmission is repeated
four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3380, the MS shall
release all resources possibly allocated for this invocation and shall
abort the procedure; no automatic MBMS context activation re-attempt
shall be performed.

b\) Expiry of timers on the network side: On the first expiry of the
timer T3385, the network shall resend the message REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT
ACTIVATION and shall reset and restart timer T3385. This retransmission
is repeated four times, i.e. on the fifth expiry of timer T3385, the
network shall release possibly allocated resources for this activation
and shall abort the procedure.

c\) MBMS context activation request for an already activated MBMS context
(on the mobile station side): If the MS receives a REQUEST MBMS CONTEXT
ACTIVATION message with the same combination of APN and IP multicast
address (i.e. PDP type and PDP address) as an already activated MBMS
context, the MS shall deactivate the existing MBMS context locally
without notification to the network and proceed with the requested MBMS
context activation.

d\) MBMS context activation request for an already activated MBMS context
(on the network side): If the network receives an ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT
REQUEST message with the same combination of APN and IP multicast
address (i.e. PDP type and PDP address) as an already activated MBMS
context, the network shall deactivate the existing MBMS context locally
without notification to the MS and proceed with the requested MBMS
context activation.

Figure 6.10/3GPP TS 24.008: MBMS context activation procedure

#### 6.1.3.9 MBMS context deactivation

The purpose of this procedure is to deactivate an existing MBMS context
in the MS and the network. The MS shall only initiate the MBMS context
deactivation when requested by the network, however the trigger for the
deactivation request by the network may be initiated by the MS at
application layer or by the network, see 3GPP TS 23.246 \[106\].

After a successful MBMS context deactivation, the associated MBMS NSAPI
and TI values shall be released in both the MS and the network and can
be reassigned to another MBMS context.

The MBMS context deactivation procedure makes use of the messaging and
signalling of the PDP context deactivation procedure as described in the
subclauses 6.1.3.9.1 and 6.1.3.9.2.

##### 6.1.3.9.1 MBMS context deactivation initiated by the network

In order to request an MBMS context deactivation, the network sends a
DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message to the MS, enters the state
MBMS-INACTIVE-PENDING and starts timer T3395. The message contains the
transaction identifier (TI) in use for the MBMS context to be
deactivated and a cause code that typically indicates one of the
following causes:

\# 36: regular deactivation;

\# 38: network failure;

\# 47: multicast group membership time-out.

The MS shall reply with a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT ACCEPT message and
enter the state PDP-INACTIVE. Upon receipt of the DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT
ACCEPT message, the network shall stop the timer T3395 and enter the
state PDP-INACTIVE.

##### 6.1.3.9.2 Abnormal cases

The following abnormal cases can be identified:

a\) Expiry of timers:

On the first expiry of the timer T3395, the network shall resend the
message DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST and shall reset and restart the
timer T3395. This retransmission is repeated, i.e. on the fifth expiry
of the timer T3395, the network shall erase the MBMS context related
data for that MS.

![](media/image55.emf){width="5.597222222222222in"
height="1.5972222222222223in"}

Figure 6.11/3GPP TS 24.008: MBMS context deactivation procedure

#### 6.1.3.10 MBMS protocol configuration options

The MS and the GGSN may communicate parameters related to the MBMS
bearer by means of the MBMS protocol configuration options information
element when activating or deactivating an MBMS context. For example,
such parameters can be used to convey information between the MS and the
GGSN.

The MBMS protocol configuration options information element is
transparent to the SGSN.

#### 6.1.3.11 Handling of APN based congestion control

The network may detect and start performing the APN based congestion
control when one or more APN congestion criteria as specified in 3GPP TS
23.060 \[74\] are met. The network may store an APN congestion back-off
time on a per MS and congested APN basis. If the MS does not provide an
APN for the PDP context activation, then the SGSN uses the APN which is
used in GGSN/PDN GW selection procedure as congested APN. When APN based
congestion control is active, the network may reject session management
requests except the modify PDP context requests from UEs or deactivate
existing PDP contexts with SM cause value \#26 \"insufficient
resources\".

In the MS, session management timers T3396 for APN based congestion
control are started and stopped on a per APN basis. The APN associated
with T3396 is the APN sent by the MS when the PDN connection is
established. If no APN is included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST
message, then T3396 is associated with no APN. For this purpose the MS
shall memorize the APN provided to the network during the PDP context
activation. The timer T3396 associated with no APN will never be started
due to any SM procedure related to an emergency PDN connection. If the
timer T3396 associated with no APN is running, it does not affect the
ability of the MS to request an emergency PDN connection.

If timer T3396 is running or is deactivated, and the MS is an MS
configured to use AC11 -- 15 in selected PLMN, then the MS is allowed to
initiate any session management procedure for the respective APN.

#### 6.1.3.11A Handling of group specific session management congestion control

The network may detect and start performing the group specific session
management congestion control when one or more group congestion criteria
as specified in 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\] are met. When group specific
session management congestion control is active, the mechanism for APN
based congestion control as specified in subclause 6.1.3.11 shall be
followed.

#### 6.1.3.12 Handling session management request for MS configured for dual priority

If timer T3396 is running for a specific APN due to one of the following
reasons:

\- an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST, ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST, MODIFY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST
message containing the low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured
for NAS signalling low priority\" was rejected with a timer value for
timer T3396 and SM cause value \#26 \"insufficient resources\";

\- a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message was received with a timer
value for timer T3396 and SM cause value \#26 \"insufficient resources\"
for a PDP context established with the low priority indicator set to
\"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\", or

\- because the MS received a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
containing a timer value for timer T3396 and SM cause value \#26
\"insufficient resources\" for a PDP context established with the low
priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low
priority\";

upon request of the upper layers the MS can:

\- send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or ACTIVATE MBMS CONTEXT REQUEST
message to the same APN, with low priority indicator set to \"MS is not
configured for NAS signalling low priority\"; or,

\- send an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message, with low priority indicator set to \"MS is not
configured for NAS signalling low priority\", for an active PDP context
established with low priority indicator set to \"MS is not configured
for NAS signalling low priority\" exists.

If timer T3396 is running, because any of the following messages
containing the low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS
signalling low priority\" was rejected with a timer value for timer
T3396 and SM cause value \#26 \"insufficient resources\":

\- an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST without an APN and with request type
different from \"emergency\"; or

\- an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message for a non-emergency PDN connection established without
APN sent by the MS,

or because the MS received a DEACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message
containing a timer value for timer T3396 and SM cause value \#26
\"insufficient resources\" for a non-emergency PDN connection
established without an APN and established with the low priority
indicator set to \"MS is configured for NAS signalling low priority\",
then upon request of the upper layers the MS can:

\- send an ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message without an APN and with
low priority indicator set to \"MS is not configured for NAS signalling
low priority\" for establishment an non-emergency PDN connection; or

\- send an ACTIVATE SECONDARY PDP CONTEXT REQUEST or MODIFY PDP CONTEXT
REQUEST message, with low priority indicator set to \"MS is not
configured for NAS signalling low priority\", for an active
non-emergency PDP context established without an APN and with low
priority indicator set to \"MS is not configured for NAS signalling low
priority\".

For requests with low priority indicator set to \"MS is configured for
NAS signalling low priority\", the MS shall follow the procedures
specified in subclause 6.1.3.1.3.

#### 6.1.3.13 Handling of network rejection not due to APN based congestion control

The network may include a back-off timer value in a session management
reject message to regulate the time interval at which the MS may retry
the same procedure. For SM cause values other than \#26 \"insufficient
resources\", the network may also include the re-attempt indicator to
indicate whether the MS is allowed to re-attempt the corresponding EPS
session management procedure for the same APN in S1 mode after
inter-system change.

NOTE 1: If the network includes this back-off timer value, then the MS
is blocked from sending another SM request for the same procedure for
the same PLMN and APN combination for the specified duration. Therefore,
the operator needs to exercise caution in determining the use of this
timer value.

NOTE 2: If the re-attempt indicator is not provided by the network, an
MS registered in its HPLMN or in an EHPLMN can use the configured
SM\_RetryAtRATChange value specified in the NAS configuration MO or in
the USIM NAS~CONFIG~ file to derive the re-attempt indicator as
specified in subclauses 6.1.3.1.3.3, 6.1.3.2.2.3, and 6.1.3.3.3.3.

If re-attempt in S1 mode is allowed, the MS shall consider the back-off
timer to be applicable only to the GPRS session management in A/Gb and
Iu mode for the rejected session management procedure and the given PLMN
and APN combination. If re-attempt in S1 mode is not allowed, the MS
shall consider the back-off timer to be applicable to both NAS
protocols, i.e. applicable to the GPRS session management in A/Gb and Iu
mode for the rejected session management procedure and to the EPS
session management in S1 mode for the corresponding EPS session
management procedure and the given PLMN and APN combination.

The APN of the PLMN and APN combination associated with the back-off
timer is the APN sent by the MS when the PDN connection is established.
If no APN is included in the ACTIVATE PDP CONTEXT REQUEST message, then
the back-off timer is associated with the combination of the PLMN and no
APN. For this purpose the MS shall memorize the APN provided to the
network during the PDP context activation. The back-off timer associated
with the combination of a PLMN with no APN will never be started due to
any SM procedure related to an emergency PDN connection. If the back-off
timer associated with the combination of a PLMN with no APN is running,
it does not affect the ability of the MS to request an emergency PDN
connection.

The network may additionally indicate in the re-attempt indicator that a
command to back-off is applicable not only for the PLMN in which the MS
received the session management reject message, but for each PLMN
included in the equivalent PLMN list at the time when the session
management reject message was received.

If the back-off timer is running or is deactivated for a given PLMN and
APN combination, and the MS is an MS configured to use AC11 -- 15 in
selected PLMN, then the MS is allowed to initiate any GPRS session
management procedure for this PLMN and APN combination.

#### 6.1.3.14 Handling of WLAN offload control

In networks that support offloading of traffic to WLAN, as specified in
3GPP TS 25.331 \[23c\], a permission to offload is determined for the MS
and the PDP context in accordance with 3GPP TS 23.060 \[74\]
subclause 5.3.21.

6.2 void
--------

6.3 Coordination between SM and GMM for supporting ISR
------------------------------------------------------

The MS with its TIN set as \"RAT‑related TMSI\" for which ISR is
activated shall change its TIN to \"P-TMSI\" to locally deactivate ISR
and stop the periodic tracking area update timer T3412 or T3423, if
running:

\- upon modification of any PDP context which was activated before the
ISR is activated in the MS;

\- upon deactivation of the last remaining PDP context in the MS;

\- at the time when the MS performs intersystem change from A/Gb mode to
S1 mode or from Iu mode to S1 mode if any PDP context activated after
the ISR was activated in the MS exists, and the MS is in EMM-IDLE mode
on completion of intersystem change; or

\- upon deactivation of last non-emergency PDP context in the MS, if the
MS has only a PDN connection for emergency bearer services remaining.

ISR remains activated on the network side in the above cases.

6.4 MSISDN notification procedure 
----------------------------------

The MSISDN notification procedure allows the MS to query the network for
its MSISDN for the purpose of user information. In order to request the
MSISDN, the MS shall encode the protocol configuration options
information element (subclause 10.5.6.3) in the MS to network direction
to indicate MSISDN query. The network shall then provide the MSISDN, if
available, in the protocol configuration options information element in
the network to MS direction. Querying the network and handling of the
provided MSISDN by the MS is implementation dependent, in a similar way
to the USSD notification or application mode defined in
3GPP TS 23.090 \[132\].

NOTE: The MS might store the provided MSISDN in the corresponding USIM
file (see 3GPP TS 31.102 \[112\] subclause 4.2.26) and such an MS could
check this USIM file to determine whether to query the network.

The network shall provide only one MSISDN. As a result, a provided
MSISDN shall supercede any MSISDN that was previously provided in the
protocol configuration options information element. The MSISDN provided
is for user information only, and the MS shall not use the MSISDN in any
NAS signalling procedure. If the MSISDN is stored in the ME, the ME
shall retain the MSISDN at power off. The MSISDN stored in the ME, if
any, can only be used if the IMSI from the USIM matches the IMSI stored
in non-volatile memory, else the MS shall delete the MSISDN.
