
H.1 Normal class
================

H.1.1 Cause No. 1 \"unassigned (unallocated) number\"
-----------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the destination requested by the mobile
station cannot be reached because, although the number is in a valid
format, it is not currently assigned (allocated).

H.1.2 Cause No. 3 \"no route to destination\"
---------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the called user cannot be reached because the
network through which the call has been routed does not serve the
destination desired.

H.1.3 Cause No. 6 \"channel unacceptable\"
------------------------------------------

This cause indicates the channel most recently identified is not
acceptable to the sending entity for use in this call.

H.1.4 Cause No. 8 \"operator determined barring\"
-------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the MS has tried to access a service that the
MS\'s network operator or service provider is not prepared to allow.

H.1.4a Cause No. 13 \"call completed elsewhere\"
------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the call is being cleared by the network
towards the present device because the called user has responded to the
call on another device. This cause only applies when the MSC/VLR is an
MSC server enhanced for ICS as specified in 3GPP TS 24.292 \[163\] and
performs interworking with SIP as specified in 3GPP TS 29.292 \[164\].

H.1.5 Cause No.16 \"normal call clearing\"
------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the call is being cleared because one of the
users involved in the call has requested that the call be cleared.

Under normal situations, the source of this cause is not the network.

H.1.6 Cause No.17 \"user busy\"
-------------------------------

This cause is used when the called user has indicated the inability to
accept another call.

It is noted that the user equipment is compatible with the call.

H.1.7 Cause No. 18 \"no user responding\"
-----------------------------------------

This cause is used when a user does not respond to a call establishment
message with either an alerting or connect indication within the
prescribed period of time allocated (defined by the expiry of either
timer T303 or T310).

H.1.8 Cause No. 19 \"user alerting, no answer\"
-----------------------------------------------

This cause is used when a user has provided an alerting indication but
has not provided a connect indication within a prescribed period of
time.

H.1.9 Cause No. 21 \"call rejected\"
------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the equipment sending this cause does not wish
to accept this call, although it could have accepted the call because
the equipment sending this cause is neither busy nor incompatible.

H.1.10 Cause No. 22 \"number changed\"
--------------------------------------

This cause is returned to a calling mobile station when the called party
number indicated by the calling mobile station is no longer assigned.
The new called party number may optionally be included in the diagnostic
field. If a network does not support this capability, cause No. 1
\"unassigned (unallocated) number\" shall be used.

H.1.10a Cause No. 24 \"call rejected due to feature at the destination\"
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This cause is returned when the call is rejected due to a feature at the
destination, e.g. Anonymous Call Rejection. This cause is only generated
by the network. This cause is not generated by the MS.

H.1.11 Cause No. 25 \"pre-emption\"
-----------------------------------

This cause is returned to the network when a mobile station clears an
active call which is being pre-empted by another call with higher
precedence.

H.1.12 Cause No. 26 \"non-selected user clearing\"
--------------------------------------------------

Not supported. Treated as cause no. 31.

H.1.13 Cause No. 27 \"destination out of order\"
------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the destination indicated by the mobile
station cannot be reached because the interface to the destination is
not functioning correctly. The term \"not functioning correctly\"
indicates that a signalling message was unable to be delivered to the
remote user; e.g., a physical layer or data link layer failure at the
remote user, user equipment off-line, etc.

H.1.14 Cause No. 28 \"invalid number format (incomplete number)\"
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the called user cannot be reached because the
called party number is not a valid format or is not complete.

H.1.15 Cause No. 29 \"facility rejected\"
-----------------------------------------

This cause is returned when a facility requested by user can not be
provided by the network.

H.1.16 Cause No. 30 \"response to STATUS ENQUIRY\"
--------------------------------------------------

This cause is included in STATUS messages if the message is sent in
response to a STATUS ENQUIRY message. See also subclause 5.5.3.

H.1.17 Cause No. 31 \"normal, unspecified\"
-------------------------------------------

This cause is used to report a normal event only when no other cause in
the normal class applies.
