
H.2 Resource unavailable class
==============================

H.2.1 Cause No. 34 \"no circuit/channel available\"
---------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that there is no appropriate circuit/channel
presently available to handle the call.

H.2.2 Cause No. 38 \"network out of order\"
-------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the network is not functioning correctly and
that the condition is likely to last a relatively long period of time;
e.g., immediately re-attempting the call is not likely to be successful.

H.2.3 Cause No. 41 \"temporary failure\"
----------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the network is not functioning correctly and
that the condition is not likely to last a long period of time; e.g.,
the mobile station may wish to try another call attempt almost
immediately.

H.2.4 Cause No. 42 \"switching equipment congestion\"
-----------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the switching equipment generating this cause
is experiencing a period of high traffic.

H.2.5 Cause No. 43 \"access information discarded\"
---------------------------------------------------

This cause indicates that the network could not deliver access
information to the remote user as requested; i.e., a user-to-user
information, low layer compatibility, high layer compatibility, or
sub-address as indicated in the diagnostic.

It is noted that the particular type of access information discarded is
optionally included in the diagnostic.

H.2.6 Cause No. 44 \"requested circuit/channel not available\"
--------------------------------------------------------------

This cause is returned when the circuit or channel indicated by the
requesting entity cannot be provided by the other side of the interface.

H.2.7 Cause No. 47 \"resource unavailable, unspecified\"
--------------------------------------------------------

This cause is used to report a resource unavailable event only when no
other cause in the resource unavailable class applies.
